Review: Girl Power: The enigma who ruled her world
Reviewed Work(s): CLEOPATRA: A Life by Stacy Schiff
Review by: GELAREH ASAYESH
Source: The American Scholar , Winter 2011, Vol. 80, No. 1 (Winter 2011), pp. 118-121 
Published by: The Phi Beta Kappa Society 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41222849
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Phi Beta Kappa Society  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to The American Scholar
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 118
 creativity. And with the flow of serotonin and
 other neurotransmitters involved in the brain's
 reward system. Humor enhances happiness.
 Curiosity creates happiness. There is that "set
 point" wherein some folks are born happy and
 some are born with the blues. But set points
 have been questioned, and identical-twin stud-
 ies should in any case be salted with the infor-
 mation that genes are not fixed but affected
 by the environment; identical twins are not
 quite identical.
 So, how do we strive for more happiness?
 One way is to keep our minds open to con-
 trasting ideas and approaches. Avoid "tunnel
 vision," Bok says, "premature closure" that
 insists on this or that single way to happiness,
 with all alternate roads leading to hell.
 Developing a greater capacity to feel grati-
 tude, Bok thinks, can facilitate an increase in
 happiness in virtually anyone. Why? Because
 "it must be learned and practiced, since it
 requires an awareness of others and depends
 on thinking and attention." But Bok is never
 content with pat solutions or with solutions
 that ignore moral considerations. Consider
 what Socrates was grateful for: "That he was
 born a human being, not an animal; a man, not
 a woman; and a Greek, not a barbarian."
 Exploring Happiness is an intellectual feast.
 Its pleasures include glimpses of the lives and
 views of such figures as the Stoic Seneca, who
 served and then quit the service of the evil
 emperor Nero, hoping but ultimately failing to
 escape with his life. Or Teilhard de Chardin, the
 French Jesuit priest and scientist who felt that
 a zest for life along with a spiritual disposition
 came with an unsought collateral compensa-
 tion-happiness. Bok's book brings together
 Western thinking about happiness across time
 and geography. It is an invitation to turn to per
sonal writing and reflection and to past thinkers
 from Goethe to the Swedish feminist Ellen Key,
 who thought that happiness was the process of
 developing our capabilities. Exploring Happi-
 ness explores not only happiness but the ques-
 tion of how we should live our lives.
 Girl Power
 The enigma who ruled her world
 REVIEW BY  GELAREH ASAYESH
 CLEOPATRA: A Life
 By Stacy Schiff, Little, Brown, 368 pp., $29.99
 The cover of Stacy Schiffs newest biogra-
 phy, Cleopatra: A Life, shows a woman adorned
 in pearls, her face hidden from the viewer.
 Despite being burdened with "one of the busiest
 afterlives in history"- there is a video game
 named for her, as well as an asteroid and a cig-
 arette-very little is known for certain about
 this most famous Egyptian queen, whose four
 children were fathered by two of the most pow-
 erful men of the era: Julius Caesar and Mark
 Antony. We do not know, for example, who her
 mother was, how long Cleopatra spent in Rome,
 how often she was pregnant, whether she actu-
 ally married Mark Antony, how she died. We
 don't even know if she was beautiful- the most
 accurate rendering of history's favorite femme
 fatale is a gold coin minted during her reign,
 likely approved by her, depicting a hook-nosed,
 large-eyed woman.
 It is a safe bet that she was extraordinarily
 well educated (Plutarch says she spoke nine lan-
 guages), fabulously wealthy (she handed out
 ships and gold to her lovers), and uncommonly
 gifted in the social graces. Cicero, who detested
 the queen, also described her as one who could
 "make others laugh in spite of themselves."
 Schiff posits a childhood spent playing with ter-
 racotta dolls and pet mice and acknowledges,
 with an honesty lacking in her historical sources,
 the limits of her powers as a biographer. Author
 of the Pulitzer Prize-winning book Véra (Mrs.
 Vladimir Nabokov), as well as books on Ben-
 jamin Franklin and Antoine de Saint-Exupéry,
 Schiff has earned a
 2ЙЖЙ£ш pher of prodisious
 Between Iran and America gifts. In attempting to
 The American Scholar, Winter 2011
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 119
 chronicle the life of Cleopatra, however, she
 faced insurmountable challenges. These she
 enumerates early on in the book: the most pro-
 lific sources on Cleopatra are biased and con-
 tradictory; no papyri survive from Cleopatra's
 Alexandria, now largely buried; in fact, only one
 word survives from the last great Egyptian
 ruler- ginesthoi, Greek for "let it be done"- and
 it may have been written by a scribe. Accept-
 ing the impossibility of filling in the blanks at a
 remove of more than 2,000 years, Schiff has
 instead "corralled the possibilities." The result
 is a narrative that never quite hits its stride and
 is plagued by such absurdities as a lovingly ren-
 dered trip up the Nile, immortalized by Shake-
 speare, which may or may not have occurred.
 "On shore the date trees hung thick with fruit,
 the palm fronds slightly faded
 season; above their heads, the pigeons visibly
 paired off."
 At the end of more than 300 pages of lovely
 prose, we have learned that fried mice were
 thought to cure the pangs of teething, that 170
 rowers probably conveyed the queen across the
 Mediterranean, that pearls dissolve only very
 slowly in vinegar, that her name means "Glory
 of Her Fatherland," but Cleopatra still does not
 have a face. For this Schiff herself is at least
 partly to blame. Even as she doggedly disman-
 tles the myths that grew like kudzu around the
 Egyptian queen, she builds new ones- of female
 power and potency, Cleopatra's canny leader-
 ship, and her place at the center of world affairs,
 which, Schiff acknowledges, was fleeting at best.
 In actual fact, Cleopatra appears to have been
 as adept at losing power as she was at regain-
 ing it, beginning and ending her rule with mis-
 steps that testified to a somewhat erratic
 brilliance. Nor does her story need gilding.
 Twice dethroned, she rose twice to ever greater
 power, through the agency of the very men who
 would have deposed her. At her death, "Queen
 Cleopatra, the Goddess, the Younger, Father-
 loving and Fatherland-loving" ruled most
 of the Eastern Mediterranean coast, and if
 she handed out gold and ships along with her
 z
 о
 и
 LU
 -i
 _)
 О
 и
 ш
 а.
 ш
 >
 Z
 о
 »-
 <
 ос
 2
 а
 О
 и
 Z
 IL
 X
 О
 и.
 >
 а
 э
 »-
 z
 LU
 и
 I
 I-
 о
 ©
 personal favors, She Elizabeth Taylor in the 1968
 received land and ^mCleopatra
 favors from her lovers """"^^
 in exchange. Like them, she had a habit of ruth-
 lessly murdering her rivals. She was the prod
uct of a tempestuous age rife with beheadings,
 poisonings, stranglings, and rending of limbs.
 If she was a sexual adventuress, her exploits
 pale in comparison to Caesar's and Antony's,
 who each had four wives, none of them Cleopa
tra, and innumerable bedmates, a few of whom
 may have been men. Schiff describes Cleopa-
 tra's 22-year reign as a brief reprieve from the
 Roman tide sweeping across the Mediter-
 ranean. After the queen's death at age 39, Egypt
 became a Roman province, regaining auton-
 omy only in the 20th century. A less obvious
 legacy was Cleopatra's impact on Roman cul-
 ture: after his Alexandrian sojourn, for exam-
 ple, Caesar reformed the Roman calendar,
 modeling it after Egypfs.
 Although the historical gaps prove unbridge-
 able, Schiff has a great deal to teach us about
 Cleopatra. Despite adopting the official title
 "Cleopatra VII," she was not the seventh but the
 sixth. She was also not Egyptian but Greek, her
 Book Reviews
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 120
 Ptolemaic dynasty having been founded by one
 of Alexander the Greaťs generals. Born 69 years
 before the birth of Christ, she was a contem
porary of King Herod and, like him, given to
 murdering her kin. The second of three daugh-
 ters, followed by two brothers, she is believed
 to have dispatched her three living siblings, two
 of whom were also her husbands. Murder and
 incest were a family tradition: Schiff offers as
 an example Ptolemy VIII, who raped his niece
 Cleopatra III while married to her mother, killed
 their 14-year-old son, chopped him up, and
 delivered the pieces to his mother as a birthday
 present. Later the couple reconciled.
 Cleopatra was also the richest person in the
 Mediterranean. It was this wealth that brought
 the military might of a succession of greedy
 Romans to bear on Egypt. Cleopatra success
fully allied herself with two of them- Caesar
 and Antony- but the third, Octavian, who would
 go on to become the Roman Emperor Augus-
 tus, ended her reign and killed her firstborn son,
 fathered by Caesar. It was he, writes Schiff, who
 repackaged Cleopatra for history as the harlot
 queen of Mark Antony's undoing. If male his-
 torians have sought to diminish Cleopatra's
 power by emphasizing her sexuality, Schiff tends
 in the opposite direction, going so far as sug
gesting that Cleopatra may have been a virgin

when, at the age of 21, she was smuggled into
 Caesar's presence in a sack of hemp or leather.
 Schiff 's reasoning? Cleopatra's brother, who was
 also her consort, was 13 and hence unlikely to
 have reached puberty. The implicit suggestion
 is that, until she met Caesar, Cleopatra was a
 faithful wife. But within months of meeting Cae-
 sar, she was pregnant with his child- his only
 issue- and had replaced her brother as Egypt's
 ruler. Caesar himself writes in his memoirs that
 he supported Cleopatra's claim to the throne
 because she was loyal. In contrast to her chron-
 iclers' embellishments, references to Cleopatra
 by her lovers were both few and remarkably dis-
 passionate. In a letter to his fellow triumvir and
 erstwhile drinking buddy Octavian, Mark
 Antony asks why the fuss over his "screwing the
 queen
 whom you get it up?" Cleopatra was, after all,
 not the only queen that Caesar and Mark Antony
 bedded in the course of their sexual-political
 conquest of the ancient world.
 Whether or not, as Plutarch claimed, Cleopa-
 tra resorted to a hunger strike to keep Mark
 Antony from returning to Rome, he did divorce
 Octavia, his Roman wife, to make his home in
 Alexandria. At the height of his discord with
 Octavian, he and Cleopatra held a ceremony
 conferring lavish titles and lands upon their
 three children. Given the state of affairs in
 Rome, Mark Antony might be said to have been
 asking for what he got: mass defections to his
 rival, defeat on land and at sea, death by his own
 hand. This section of the book is vivid and
 romantic. Having registered her doubts about
 Plutarch and Dio as accurate chroniclers of
 the Antony-Cleopatra story, Schiff surrenders
 to their version of events in which Mark Antony
 dies in Cleopatra's arms. The queen commits
 suicide as well, leaving her children to be raised
 by the scorned Octavia, half sister of Octavian.
 Octavian then founds an empire and rules for
 44 years- ample time to rewrite history.
 There can be little doubt that we have fallen
 victim to his efforts, yet one could wish that
 Schiff did not yield so much narrative ground
 to resitting historical uncertainties. Stripped of
 its fabulous trappings, Cleopatra's tale is one of
 enduring geopolitical realities, the story of a
 Middle Eastern monarch doing what she could
 to protect her sovereignty and her national
 resources from the superior military might of
 the West. As a tribute to female power, Cleopa-
 tra is an ironic one. As Schiff notes, her dis-
 tinction lies in the power she possessed to barter
 herself directly, rather than being pimped by
 her male relatives. In the idiom of our own time,
 Cleopatra's story is about the ultimate power
 couple. As such it raises fascinating questions
 about where politics ends and love begins. Does
 Hillary Clinton love Bill and vice versa? Did
 Cleopatra, who had viable political prospects
 long after her lover's were exhausted, stick with
 The American Scholar, Winter 2011
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 121
 Mark Antony out of loyalty or despondency?
 Schiff, earnestly explaining why the Egyp-
 tian queen is unlikely to have been killed by the
 sting of an asp hidden in a basket of figs (too big
 to hide among figs, too painful to be her first
 choice, too sluggish to kill Cleopatra's atten-
 dants as well as the queen herself), does not
 waste time pondering these imponderables. Her
 Cleopatra is more complex than Plutarch's,
 Livy's, and Appian's, yet simpler than she
 deserves. Shakespeare got it right when he wrote
 of Cleopatra: "Age cannot wither her, nor cus-
 tom stale / Her infinite variety." He, of course,
 was wise enough to eschew fact for fiction.
 Despite the obstacles in her path, we are fortu-
 nate that Schiff has not done the same.
 Tour de Horse
 A masterly retelling of a death
 on the Plains
 REVIEW BY
 ' ANDREW GRAYBILL
 THE KILLING OF CRAZY HORSE
 By Thomas Powers, Knopf, 568 pp., $30
 In a sunny corridor on the second floor of
 the Nebraska state capítol sits a bust of Red
 Cloud, a renowned leader of the Oglala Sioux
 who, in 2000, was enshrined in the Nebraska
 Hall of Fame. At first blush, Red Cloud might
 seem out of place, given that neighboring stat-
 ues pay homage to Cornhusker luminaries like
 novelist Willa Cather and anthropologist Lo-
 ren Eiseley. Moreover, Red Cloud is best known
 for the eponymous war he fought against the
 иииишв United States be-
 AndrewGraybfflzsa^oc/- tween 1866 and 1868,
 ate professor of history at the which claimed Scores
 University of Nebraska. He is n , .. . . „,,
 finishingabookabouta of n white , .. victims. . . The „,,
 Montana family of mixed chief, however, had a
 native-white ancestry and the secona j act f as a noted f j
 changing racial landscape in secona act f as a noted f j
 the West, 1850-1950. advocate for peace. He
 settled his followers on an agency in north-
 western Nebraska (since relocated to South
 Dakota), where he worked to improve their liv
ing conditions. According to the plaque beneath
 his likeness, he remained "a steadfast advocate
 for his people" until his death in 1909.
 Visitors to the capitol will find no bust of
 Crazy Horse, although he lived and died in
 Nebraska, and- like Red Cloud- was fiercely
 dedicated to the Oglalas. In the end, his style of
 leadership is harder for the public to embrace,
 given that Crazy Horse proved far less pliable
 than many Indian leaders of his time, including
 Sitting Bull, who toured with Buffalo Bill's Wild
 West Show and ultimately accepted confine-
 ment on the Standing Rock Reservation. And
 then, of course, there is the uncomfortable mat-
 ter of his death at Camp Robinson on Septem-
 ber 5, 1877, one of the most shameful episodes
 in the U.S. conquest of Native America. Who
 wants to be reminded ofthat on a quiet Sunday
 afternoon tour through the state's monument
 to fair play and the rule of law?
 Thomas Powers's tremendous new book
 serves as an admirable stand-in for the missing
 bust, and reminds us why, more than 130 years
 after his death, Crazy Horse retains such a pow-
 erful hold on the American imagination. Befit
ting such an unusual personality as its subject,

The Killing of Crazy Horse likewise defies easy
 classification. Powers's study is not a biography,
 because the title character disappears for
 lengthy stretches (and as the author himself
 notes, historian Kingsley Bray has recently pub-
 lished a very satisfying portrait of the warrior).
 Neither is the book a full account of the Sioux
 struggle to resist US. expansion onto the Plains,
 for Powers largely ignores the Dakota War of
 1862 and the Wounded Knee Massacre of 1890,
 the opening and closing chapters ofthat sad tale.
 Instead, Powers's volume is an extended
 rumination on the turbulent period between
 1866 and 1877, during which Crazy Horse played
 perhaps the most important role in the colli-
 sion of white and native cultures on the north-
 ern Plains. Although the story maybe familiar
 Book Reviews
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms