Museum Review: Hatshepsut and Her World
Author(s): Emily Teeter
Source: American Journal of Archaeology , Oct., 2006, Vol. 110, No. 4 (Oct., 2006), pp. 
649-653 
Published by: Archaeological Institute of America 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/40025062
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Archaeological Institute of America  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to American Journal of Archaeology
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 MUSEUM REVIEW
 Hatshepsut and Her World
 EMILY TEETER
 Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh. The
 Metropolitan Museum of Art, 28 March-9
 July 2006, and at the Kimbell Art Museum, Fort
 Worth, 27 August-31 December 2006, organized
 by Catharine Roehrig.
 Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh, edited by
 Catharine Roehrig, with Renee Dreyfus and Cathleen
 Keller. Pp. 340, figs. 112. The Metropolitan Mu-
 seum of Art, New York, and Yale University Press
 2005. $50 (paper); $65 (cloth). ISBN 1-58839-173
6 (paper); 1-58839-172-8 (cloth).
 Hatshepsut, the famous Egyptian queen who became
 pharaoh, ruled during the early 18th Dynasty (ca. 1479-1485
 B.C.E.) of the New Kingdom. Her career, first as regent for
 her stepson/nephew Thutmose III and her later joint rule
 with him, lasted less than 15 years, but it is a reign that is
 writ large in history. The character and motivations of this
 woman have been the issue of speculation ever since there
 was a discipline of Egyptology. In the mid 20th century, the
 usually sober Cambridge Ancient History painted her in mi
sogynistic terms as "conniving," as a "shrewd, ambitious and

unscrupulous woman," and as the "detested stepmother." Her
 assumption of full regency was characterized as "flaunting
 the royal titulary."1 Another standard reference for Egyptian
 history commented: "It is not to be imagined, however, that
 even a woman of the mostvirile character could have attained
 such a pinnacle of power without masculine support."2
 This subject is a museum director's dream: an exhibition
 about a powerful yet misunderstood woman (an Egyptian
 pharaoh to boot) , who left an incredibly rich material legacy
 and whose history is in dire need of reexamination. And who
 better to organize such an exhibition than the Metropolitan
 Museum of Art?3 The institution excavated many of her monu-
 ments and houses many of the major artifacts of her era.
 Considering the popular and scholarly interest in, and
 uncertainty about, the events of the period and the allure of
 the topic (a powerful woman, hints of a sexual relationship,
 frayed family relations) , it is surprising that it took so long for
 a major reexamination of the era to be mounted. From 1996
 to 1998, Geheimnisvolle Konigin Hatschepsut: Agyptische Kunst
 des 15.Jahrhundrets v. Chr toured Berlin, Hanover, Munich,
 and Warsaw. That exhibition consisted of 89 objects drawn
 from German and Polish museum collections. A smaller
 show, Hatschepsut Konigin Agyptens (note the clever pun in
 "Konigin") , was mounted in Munich in 1999. It was a heavily
 historical exhibit that consisted of 24 objects that, with one
 exception, came from German collections.
 Finally, we have an exhaustive presentation, the scale of
 which is characteristic of the Metropolitan Museum with its
 tremendous influence and resources. Hatshepsut: From Queen
 to Pharaoh consists of 200 objects, from small to monumental,
 drawn from collections throughout the world, including
 items from Cairo. There are few objects from the era that
 the curators did not include. This is truly an ambitious and
 ultimately successful exhibition.
 The museum's Egyptian department and its designers
 give visitors a preview of the exhibition's glories before they
 even enter the galleries. A colossal granite sphinx (fig. 1)
 from the joint reign of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III stands
 in the lobby, enticing museum-goers to the show.
 The exhibition is arranged in a series of nine large rooms in
 the vast Tisch galleries. The dark blue introductory chamber
 highlights a sole spectacular object: a granite statue of the
 queen in her guise as king (cat. no. 94). The wall text gives
 historical background on Hatshepsut, on that period in Egypt
 ("the pyramids were more than one thousand years old") , and
 on female kings in other eras, and introduces the woman and
 her career up to the time of her coronation as senior co-ruler
 with her nephew Thutmose III. Although there is a limit to
 the amount of text that can be included on gallery walls, the
 omission of any reference to the proscription of the queen
 in the sole reign of Thutmose III - such an important part
 of the story - seems odd, for this is one of the great riddles
 and well-known controversies in Egyptology. After the death
 of Hatshepsut, Thutmose III ordered that monuments show-
 ing her as king be effaced and recarved with the name of
 her father or husband, Thutmose I and II. Traditionally, it
 was assumed that these acts of damnatio memoriae took place
 when Thutmose came to the throne as sole king, and that
 they were in retribution for having to share the throne with
 Hatshepsut. However, over the last two decades, this issue has
 been examined, and the exhibition (and even more so the
 catalogue) is the perfect vehicle for making this recent and
 highly technical research accessible. The reinterpretation
 is based primarily on the research of the late Charles Nims
 and on the more recent work of Peter Dorman, who notes
 that the erasures were not undertaken early in the reign of
 Thutmose III but at least 20 years after Hatshepsut' s death,
 which implies a different motivation. Further, not all images
 of Hatshepsut were altered, only those that showed her as
 1 Hayes 1973, 317-18.
 2Gardiner 1961, 184.
 3 Together with the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.
 American Journal of Archaeology 110 (2006) 649-53
 649
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 650 EMILY TEETER [AJA110
 Fig. 1. Colossal sphinx of Hatshepsut, early 18th Dynasty, granite (courtesy Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
 York; Rogers Fund 1931, 31.3.166).
 king. Although there does not seem to be a simple expla-
 nation for the actions of Thutmose III, Dorman cautiously
 suggests in a catalogue essay that the deliberate rewriting of
 history may have been either a response to the "conceptual
 and practical complications"4 of a female king (although she
 was not the first or the last female to claim the throne) or an
 attempt to eliminate references to the potentially competing
 Ahmoside line to the throne (but as Dorman further notes,
 there seems to have been no Ahmoside contender) . The
 introduction to the exhibition would have benefited from
 at least a hint of these issues.
 The introduction segues into the first gallery, which is
 devoted to the predecessors of Hatshepsut and the formative
 art of the time. Here, the visitor is introduced to the historic
 events of the Second Intermediate period and early New
 Kingdom (ca. 1650-1550 B.C.E.), with the expulsion of the
 Hyksos and the rise of the Ahmoside and Thutmoside lines.
 Objects from a woman's burial of the later Second Interme
diate period demonstrate the richness of elite tombs of the
 period immediately preceding Hatshepsut. The gallery also
 contains a wealth of early 18th-Dynasty sculpture, including
 the bust of a queen (cat. no. 8) ; the seated statue of Thutmose
 II's mother, Queen Mutnofret (cat. no. 9); and small-scale
 statues of men and women (cat. nos. 17-20). All of these
 give excellent background on the art of the era. Among
 the spectacular pieces is a limestone relief of Hatshepsut' s
 husband, Thutmose II, kneeling before the god Amun (cat.
 no. 38). This enormous relief (107 x 109 cm) from the
 Open Air Museum at Karnak is just one of the little-known
 masterpieces of Thutmoside sculpture.
 The next gallery has no text panel to identify its theme.
 Presumably it continues from the previous room, although
 the spaces are not the same color. The gallery is dominated
 by the famed sculpture of a very feminine representation
 of Hatshepsut (fig. 2) but one expressed in terms of male
 iconography. Unlike earlier statues that show her in this same
 pose wearing a female garment, her garb here is male (she
 wears the royal shendyt kilt with a bull's tail between her legs) .
 Yet the delicate proportions of her heart-shaped face and
 the subtle but obvious breasts mark the figure as a woman.
 This same ambiguity is evident in the texts on the front of
 the throne that simply add feminine endings to male kingly
 titles, employing "Lady of the Two Lands" for the traditional
 "Lord of the Two Lands." A final assertion of kingly power
 is represented by the Nine Bows, the traditional enemies of
 Egypt, under her feet - a detail that was not included in her
 images as queen. Other objects include a handsome chair
 of Renisenb (cat. no. 192), a block statue (cat. no. 53) of
 4Roehrig 2005, 269.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 2006] HATSHEPSUT AND HER WORLD 651
 Satepihu on loan from the University of Pennsylvania, and
 other small objects from early in Hatshepsut's era. Visitors
 with little background in the history of the 18th Dynasty
 might be puzzled by the label for the fine shawabti of Puy
emre (cat. no. 51), which refers to hacking out the name of
 Hatshepsut in the reign of Thutmose III, because this issue
 is not mentioned earlier. The same minor discontinuity is
 apparent on the label for the statue of Senenmut (cat. no.
 64) , which refers to the proscription of his memory.
 The subsequent gallery discusses Hatshepsut's rise to
 kingly status as a legitimate ruler and her reign in an era
 of prosperity, peace, and creativity. Objects reflect mainly
 daily life: two metal jars on stands (cat. nos. 177-78), pot-
 tery vessels in the form of baskets (cat. nos. 157-59) , a small,
 multicompartmentbox (cat. no. 187) (fig. 3), and a linen sto-
 rage chest of Perpauti (cat. no. 25) painted with scenes of him
 with his family. There are some fascinating objects in this
 gallery, such as a section of the Book of the Dead of Maiher
peri (cat. no. 35) . A Nubian nobleman raised in the Egyptian
 court, Maiherperi was buried in the Valley of the Kings. A
 highlight of the gallery is the spectacular gold dish of General
 Djehuti (cat. no. 176).
 The next gallery, painted a dramatic dark blue, is dedicated
 to the family and career of Senenmut, "The Great Steward of
 Amun" and tutor to Neferure, Hatshepsut's daughter. Upon
 entering, one sees material from the tomb of Senenmut' s
 parents, Hatnefer and Ramose. The Metropolitan Museum's
 discovery of the tomb in 1936 is a fascinating story related in
 the wall text. The objects include Hatnefer' s chair (cat. no.
 47) (fig. 4) and heart scarab (cat. no. 41 ) , which was certainly
 a royal gift, judging from its exquisite quality (even though it
 was reinscribed for Hatnefer) . Other touching personal items
 such as a razor and cosmetic containers are also exhibited.
 Senenmut's role in the reign of Hatshepsut and the na-
 ture of his relationship with her have long been debated. In
 popular accounts, Senenmut is rumored to be the female
 pharaoh's lover, or at least a palace schemer and manipula-
 tor, and an evil genius who was behind Hatshepsut's rise to
 power. This historical fantasy is not addressed in the exhibi
tion, but it is eloquently discussed by Keller in the catalogue
 essay, "Hatshepsut's Reputation in History." The scholarly
 uncertainty concerning the exact role that he played in the
 conception of the royal temple at Deir el-Bahri is reflected
 in both the show and the catalogue. The text panels state, "It
 may also have been Senenmut who conceived Hatshepsut's
 exquisite temple at Deir el-Bahri," and the catalogue notes,
 "it was he who provided the inspiration for this monument."5
 But elsewhere one reads, "The common claim that Senenmut
 was the architect of Deir el-Bahri ... is otherwise unsubstanti-
 ated."6 What is clearer is the man's creativity and his access
 to the royal workshops, as demonstrated by the many statues
 of himself that he commissioned and that introduce entirely
 new compositional types: he holds the royal princess (cat. nos.
 60-1), he presents a sistrum (the monumental Cairo statue
 [cat. no. 66] specifically states that it was a royal gift) , he poses
 with his surveyor's cord (cat. no. 65). There are also statues
 that incorporate a cryptographic writing of Hatshepsut's
 name (cat. nos. 70-2 ). In the inscription on one statue,
 Fig. 2. Hatshepsut as king, early 18th Dynasty, crystalline
 (indurated) limestone (courtesy Metropolitan Museum of
 Art, New York; Rogers Fund 1929, 29.3.2).
 Senenmut boasts that the sculptures represent "Images which
 I have made from the devising of my own heart and from
 my own labor; they have not been found in the writings of
 the ancestors."
 The assembling of virtually all the known statues of
 Senenmut in one gallery is reason enough to see and love
 this exhibition. As a bonus, the conservators in New York
 have cleaned decades of Cairo grime off the monumental
 statue, exposing its beautiful color. The wall text here finally
 addresses the issue of the effacing of his name that has
 spawned so many dramatic historical reconstructions of this
 era. The grouping of Senenmut statues also gives the viewer
 the rare opportunity to compare sculptural representations of
 a single individual executed over a short time span. One may
 note variations in the shape of Senenmut's face: the larger
 statues are generally broader through the cheekbones than
 the smaller examples. Other variables are the style of the
 wig and the presence or absence of fat rolls on an otherwise
 slender body, an indication of exalted status rather than actual
 body type. Such elements are due to the symbolic nature of
 Egyptian art. These are not portraits of the man but eternal
 5Roehrig 2005, 113.
 6Roehrig 2005, 108.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 652 EMILY TEETER [AJA110
 Fig. 3. Box with two sliding lids, early 18th Dynasty, cypress,
 boxwood (courtesy Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York;
 Rogers Fund 1936, 36.3.199).
 images intended to convey information about his status and
 his relationship to the royal family.
 The following room, in a less intense mood, details the
 famed funerary temple of Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahri and
 how it relates to royal ritual and popular cult activities. The
 text also explains how the design of Deir el-Bahri is derived
 from the nearby temple of Mentuhotep II (the founder of
 the Middle Kingdom). Through emulation of architectural
 styles, Hatshepsut sought to reinforce her own position as
 king. A kneeling statue of Hatshepsut as king (cat. no. 93) is
 illustrative of the many statues that flanked the processional
 way (this example is from the middle terrace). The gallery
 also contains a selection of one of the royal foundation
 deposits (consisting of scarabs, beads, amulets, and model
 tools [cat. nos. 75-7] ) that established the identity of the
 ruler who commissioned the structure. The relevance of the
 temple for the local elite is indicated by objects from a tomb
 of a woman who was buried at the base of the cliffs near the
 temple, as well as by objects from a nearby funeral deposit.
 Beautiful items, such as a group of blue faience "marsh
 bowls" (cat. nos. 101-5), many of which were votive offerings
 to Hathor of Deir el-Bahri, are presented. The connection
 of the selection of figure vases (cat. nos. 161-68), the relief
 from Elephantine (cat. no. 49) showing the goddess Anukis,
 and a fragment of a Karnak obelisk (cat. no. 78) to the site
 of Deir el-Bahri is not immediately apparent.
 The following gallery is dominated by three great sphinxes:
 two of Hatshepsut and one of a queen of Thutmose III (cat.
 nos. 11, 88-9). The labels underscore the irony that those
 of Hatshepsut were preserved through their destruction;
 the pieces were later recovered for reconstruction by the
 Metropolitan Museum.
 Gallery 6 addresses the relationship between Hatshepsut
 and her father, Thutmose I. She claimed the right to the
 throne through him, a succession that was justified by an
 oracle and furthered by her claim to be descended from
 Amun. One aspect of the story is told by the great granite
 false door of Thutmose I (cat. no. 87) from the upper terrace
 of Hatshepsut's temple at Deir el-Bahri. It is displayed in a
 recess that imitates the chapel in which it was found. In the
 recess for Hatshepsut's image is a granite statue of the female
 king (wearing female garb and no false beard [cat. no. 61 ] ) ,
 which may have been the focus of cult worship at the temple.
 Opposite are reliefs of Thutmose I (with splendid carving
 and pigment [cat. no. 83]); one of Hatshepsut recarved as
 Thutmose II, presumably upon the order of Thutmose III
 (cat. no. 84); and one of Thutmose III (cat. no. 85), which
 neatly summarizes the relationship of these individuals.
 Gallery 7 focuses on the foreign wives of Thutmose III and
 the material from their shared tomb, as well as other examples
 of contemporary jewelry not associated with that find. Most
 stunning is the well-known diadem with gazelles (cat. no.
 113), which, according to the label and catalogue, was worn
 by a woman who participated in rituals associated with the
 goddess Hathor. It is not clear why the statue of Hatshepsut
 presenting a nemset vessel (cat. no. 91) is located in this gal-
 lery, or how the headrest (cat. no. 190) and the fittings from
 a bed (cat. no. 191) relate to the theme of this section. The
 wall text that explains the theme of the gallery is a little too
 inconspicuous and therefore easily overlooked.
 The small Gallery 8 is painted an appealing blue. The
 text describes the transition from Hatshepsut's original cliff
 tomb to her final tomb in the Valley of the Kings (to show
 her kingly status) . The gallery is dominated by the granite
 sarcophagus of Hatshepsut recarved for Thutmose I (cat.
 no. 108) and small objects associated with the tomb, such as
 two alabaster jars (cat. no. 106) probably originally intended
 for the royal tomb but recovered with the material from the
 foreign wives. Objects with a purely funerary function (gold
 sandals and finger and toe stalls [cat. nos. 134, 135a-b] are
 also shown). The association with the tomb of a beautiful
 jasper gaming piece in the form of a lion's head (cat. no.
 107) is not explained on the label or in the catalogue. A map
 showing the location of the tomb and/or a plan of the tomb
 would have helped place the artifacts in context.
 The final gallery is devoted to the successful reign of
 Thutmose III and the debt he owed to the tutelage of
 Hatshepsut. Yet later in his reign, he chose to attack monu
ments that perpetuated her memory. Physical attacks were
 not limited to her own monuments but also included those
 around her, as documented by the statue of the official,
 Ahmose (cat. no. 198) , whose inscriptions have been altered
 (the name Thutmose I or II was substituted for the name
 of the female pharaoh). A large case heaped with smashed
 pieces of Hatshepsut's statues (not listed in the catalogue)
 is a vivid illustration of the destruction of her monuments.
 It is an intriguing jumble of painted and carved fragments,
 some of which can be identified as parts of an ear, nose, or
 crown. The large-format photographs of the Metropolitan
 Museum's excavation of the fragments at Deir el-Bahri evoke
 the scale and difficulties of the work and the fury of the
 ancient destruction.
 This is an excellent and comprehensive exhibition. Few
 of the major monuments from the era, large or small, are
 omitted. The spacing of the cases is generous, and most
 objects can be viewed in the round. A significant number
 of the large sculptures and reliefs are not in cases, which
 allows uncompromised viewing. The lighting (by Clint Ross
 Coller and Rich Lichte) is arranged well. The viewer casts
 no irritating shadows on the labels or cases. The designer,
 Daniel Kershaw, has restrained himself tojust two wall colors,
 gray and blue, that effectively mark the transition between
 galleries without creating a jarring contrast.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 2006] HATSHEPSUT AND HER WORLD 653
 Fig. 4. Chair from the tomb of Hatnefer, early 18th Dynasty, boxwood, cypress, ebony, linen cord (courtesy Met-
 ropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Rogers Fund 1936, 36.3.152).
 Hatshepsut: From Queen to Pharaoh is presented as an art
 and archaeological exhibition, and without the excellent
 catalogue in hand, most visitors may not be aware of the
 tremendous amount of new scholarship that the show re-
 flects. Among the topics addressed in the catalogue's short
 essays are new perspectives on the relationship of Hatshepsut
 and Senenmut, the monuments of Hatshepsut, and, most
 importantly, a new and less hysterical reading of the rela-
 tionship of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III. Some notable
 sections discuss the temple of Thutmose III at Deir el-Bahri
 (written by Jadwiga Lipinska, who oversaw their excava
tion), the queen's complex (by Dieter Arnold, a prominent
 architectural historian, Egyptologist, and curator in the
 Metropolitan Museum's Egyptian department) , the statuary
 of Hatshepsut and Senenmut (by Keller), and the proscrip-
 tion of Hatshepsut (by Dorman). The catalogue distills this
 highly academic and technical research for a more general
 audience, making it an important new resource for early
 18th-Dynasty history and art.
 This is an ambitious, exhaustive, and exhilarating exhibi-
 tion that will have wide appeal - from die-hard fans of Egypt
 to those who simply love beautiful antiquities and are not so
 concerned with the historical issues. It is difficult to imagine
 that this amount of material pertaining to Hatshepsut and her
 contemporaries will ever again be compiled. The catalogue
 is an important piece of scholarship that will do much to
 remove many of the colorful misconceptions of the era.
 THE ORIENTAL INSTITUTE
 UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
 1 155 EAST 5 8TH STREET
 CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60637
 ETEETER@UCHICAGO.EDU
 Works Cited
 Gardiner, A. 1961 . Egypt of the Pharaohs. Oxford: Clarendon
 Press.
 Hayes, W.C. 1973. History of the Middle East and the Aegean
 Region c. 1800-1380B.C CAH 2(1). 3rd ed. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms