Nefertiti's Eyes
Author(s): Earl L. Ertman
Source: Archaeology , March/April 2008, Vol. 61, No. 2 (March/April 2008), pp. 28-32
Published by: Archaeological Institute of America 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41780340
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Archaeological Institute of America  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Archaeology
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
/';-=09 )(8* =-0/']
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
All of the in (KV62) Press February eyes Egypt's chamber were speculation in Valley 1922. 5, now on 2006, of the known was the when Valley rampant Kings as our KV63, since of expedition over the that the what Kings first of first the Tutankhamun the tomb tomb looked morning found might into
of February 5, 2006, when our expedition first looked into
the chamber now known as KV63, the first tomb found
in Egypt's Valley of the Kings since that of Tutankhamun
(KV62) in 1922.
Press speculation was rampant over what the tomb might
hold. Would our expedition find the mummies of royal women from the late
18th Dynasty, such as Queen Nefertiti, thought by some to be Tuts mother?
Or the six princesses she bore to the pharaoh Akhenaten, including Tuts queen,
Ankhesenamun? The mummies of these women have either not been found or
identified. Perhaps they were removed from Akhenatens capital at Amarna when
a later king, presumably Tut, returned to the traditional capital of Thebes on the
Nile opposite the Valley of the Kings. Did Tut rebury them in the Valley?
After taking out several stones blocking the doorway from the tomb shaft
into the chamber, we peered through the narrow opening. Inside, we could see
many large ceramic jars and several wooden coffins, some with yellow-painted
faces. The press speculation was incorrect on all counts. We found no mummies
in any of the tombs seven coffins and no inscriptions to tell us for whom these
coffins were initially intended.
Nefertiti's Eyes
Did the queen's distinctive feature
become a symbol of Egyptian royalty?
by Earl L« Ertman
But while studying the coffins, I discovered - in the eyes of faces painted on
three of them - an intriguing link to Nefertiti, the queen whose name means,
simply, "the beautiful one has come." While none of the coffins held Nefertiti's
remains, the eyes may tell us something unexpected about her celebrated beauty.
Was it in part the result of a genetic syndrome?
If small (the not natural gilt a royal coffinette, salt tomb, used two in what large mummification), alabaster was KV63? vessels, Finds and floral many include garlands, ceramics. the seven pillows, It coffins, seems natron to a
small gilt coffinette, two large alabaster vessels, floral garlands, pillows, natron
(the natural salt used in mummification), and many ceramics. It seems to
have been a cache of material used by embalmers, but including coffins, unused
or salvaged from disturbed burials, suitable for upper-class, but not elite or
royal, funerals.
Although KV63 didn't yield the mummies of Nefertiti, Ankhesenamun,
and the rest, the tomb is linked to Tutankhamuns time. Seal impressions found
there match some discovered in Tuts tomb, which is just 50 feet away. KV63s
date should fall within or close to Tuts reign (1343-1333 b.c.), but association
with his burial is uncertain at this point. Perhaps we will gain further evidence
for the date of KV63 from the contents of the remaining 16, of 28 total, storage
jars that we plan to open this season.
Otto Schaden, our expedition director, asked me, as staff art historian and
object analyst, if any information could be gleaned from the coffins to narrow
this date range. I began with the four coffins that had yellow-painted faces. The
www.archaeology.org 29
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
This stela from Amarna shows Queen
Nefertiti holding two of her daughters.
It is one of the earliest depictions of her
peculiar eye shape. Her husband, the
pharaoh Akhenaten, appears on the same
relief with normal eyes.
Detail of a relief showing Nefertiti
kissing one of her daughters, perhaps
Meritaten, who is depicted with the
same eye shape as her mother.
KV63 coffins were almost totally destroyed by
termites, but the faces were made separately Faces
on coffins were often covered with thin plaster
or gesso as a base for gilding or painting (as in
the KV63 coffins) ♦ The termites seem to prefer
untreated wood, so while the remainder of the
coffins were mostly consumed, the gessoed and
painted faces survived»
In the art of the ancient Near East, including
Egypt, females were generally depicted with lighter
skin than males» Were the coffins with light yellow
faces made for women? Two such coffins in
museum collections, however, were inscribed for
males» Furthermore, a painting in a tomb in Thebes
shows coffins of Nebamun and Ipuky, sculptors
who worked during the reigns of kings Amen-
hotep III and his son Akhenaten» Each of their
black coffins has a yellow-painted face» So rather
than indicating the coffins were for females, the yellow faces
probably copied those of the very wealthy, who could afford
gold faces on their coffins»
With no inscriptions and the ambiguous nature of the
yellow face color, I began looking at other characteristics
that might prove helpful, such as the shape and details of the
faces» In doing that, the eyes on three of the painted KV63
coffins brought me back to Nefertiti»
Nefertiti is best known from the painted bust of her
found at Amarna and now in Berlin» Her parentage is not
entirely certain, but most Egyptologists believe she was the
daughter of the powerful courtier Ay, who eventually succeeded
Tutankhamun»
The face of one, which we designated coffin A, had eyes
rimmed with blue glass in a traditional shape, unlike the
other three coffins with yellow faces, designated B, F, and
G» What links the eyes of these three coffins, beside the fact
that all are painted, is that the inner canthus - the corner
of the eye near the nose - descends abruptly and abuts the
upper lid, giving them an East Asian appearance» Nefertiti s
famous bust illustrates this eye shape better than words»
Both her proper right eye and the empty socket of the left
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
show this form» What is the meaning
of this eye shape?
Art when titi of reigned, Akhenaten the Amarna is noted and period, Nefer- for its
when Akhenaten and Nefertiti
reigned, is noted for its
naturalistic depiction of plants and
animals and, in some cases, candid
scenes of daily life» So one might
suggest that the shape of Nefertiti s
eyes may be an attempt to render her
features as they actually appeared»
One of the earliest appearances of
ARCHAEOLOGY • March/April 2008
A wooden head of Tutankhamun
emerging from a lotus flower,
found in his tomb, shows the
young pharaoh with eyes like
those of Nefertiti, who may have
been his mother.
Coffin F is one of three from KV63, an
embalmer's cache from around the time of
Tutankhamun, that shows faces with eyes
shaped similarly to Nefertiti's.
Nefertiti s unusual eye shape is on a stela showing the royal
family Found at Amarna and now in Berlin, it is dated by an
inscription to before years 8 through 12 of Akhenatens reign,
or around 1350 b.c. On the stela, however, Akhenatens eye
shape is "normal" and resembles those seen on sculptures of
him in Thebes, but Nefertitis is not« So this stela may show
a real, physical condition»
It could be that Nefertiti had an epicanthic fold, a piece
of skin from the upper eyelid covering the inner edge of the
eye. This feature is found not just in people of East Asian
descent, but also in individuals with a number of differ-
ent syndromes - groups of symptoms characteristic of an
abnormality - some of which are genetically based. Some
syndromes are debilitating, others less so, and still others
are passed only from mothers to daughters. We are currendy
investigating the possibility that Nefertitis eyes reflect such
an underlying physical condition, but without her remains
no diagnosis can be made (and the evidence may have been
destroyed or altered during mummification).
If a genetically based physical trait was the basis for this
eye shape, did Nefertiti pass it on to her children and was it
recorded in the appearance of their eyes in artwork? Images
of Nefertiti show the trait more frequendy and markedly
than those of any other individual portrayed at Amarna.
German excavators at Amarna in 1912 found many repre-
sentations of Nefertiti and her daughters in the studio of an
artist named Tuthmosis, including the painted bust of Nefertiti.
Many of these representations are in various stages of
completion,
but their distinctive eyes are easily noticed. This
is
especially clear in a relief, now in the Brooklyn Museum,
that
may show Meritaten, the queens eldest daughter.
It is possible that Nefertiti was Tutankhamuns mother.
If so, it wouldn't be surprising if he were shown with an eye
shape similar to hers. This is the case with some depictions,
such as a wooden head of the young pharaoh that was found
in his tomb. It shows his head, sprouting from a lotus bloom,
with eyes that match those of Nefertiti. Other explanations
for its appearance with Tut include the possibility that
his mother was not Nefertiti but perhaps a woman of the
extended royal family who also carried the trait. And it could
even be that Tut did not have the eye shape himself, if his
mother was a woman other than Nefertiti who did not have
www.archaeology.org 31
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Right, a painted relief from Nefertari's
tomb shows the 19th Dynasty queen
making offerings to the gods. Her eye
is shown shaped similarly to her 18th
Dynasty predecessor Nefertiti.
Left, detail of a stela showing Amenhotep III,
Nefertiti's father-in-law, that was probably
carved after his death. It shows him with
Nefertiti's signature eye shape, perhaps used
as an artistic convention rather than as a
realistic depiction of his appearance.
it or if the trait was passed only from mothers to daughters*
In either case, Tut could be shown with it simply as an artistic
continuance of the characteristic
If extended recording the sculptor its and use then from re-creating Tuthmosis those who this actually were eye shape, had responsible it perhaps to - as for he an
recording and then re-creating this eye shape, perhaps he
extended its use from those who actually had it to - as an
artistic convention - a "royal marker" to distinguish images
of the king and a few select nobles. For example, this eye
shape is also seen on a representation of King Amenhotep
III, Akhenatens father, seated in a relaxed pose with his
wife Queen Tiy on a stela found at Amarna, and now in the
British Museum* Amenhotep III was Nefertiti's father-inlaw,
but this stela was probably carved after his death, so the
eye
shape does not predate its appearance on Nefertiti* It is
also used in the 19th Dynasty, such as in depictions of the
pharaoh Seti I at Abydos and in the tomb of Nefertari, queen
of Rameses II, who died around 1254 b*c*
And this brings us back to KV63, with its upper-class
coffins* Like the yellow faces meant to represent gilding, did
the eye shape seek to portray a "royal marker" derived from
Nefertiti's own eyes?
The final word is not yet in, but there seems to be a high
probability that Nefertiti herself had eyes with epicanthic
folds or eyes with a similar shape with descending inner
canthi* Eyes of this type undoubtedly created what must
have been quite a striking feature to all who saw her* This
may have been passed along to some of her royal offspring*
Moreover, in the sun cult that they fostered, both Nefertiti
and her husband Akhenaten were the only ones through
whom prayers could be directed to the solar god Aten* This
divine or semi-divine status may have accounted for this eye
shape being transformed into an artistic convention that was
copied by high-ranking officials and subsequent rulers* ■
Earl L* Ertman is a professor emeritus at the University
of Akron . An authority on art of the Amarna period, he is
a member of the KV63 expedition . For news of the 2008
season at the tomb, see www.kv-63.com. The excavation
is part of the Amenmesse Project, a mission of Egypt's
Supreme Council of Antiquities.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
ARCHAEOLOGY • March/April 2008