Power and Gender in Ancient Egypt: The Case of Hatshepsut
Author(s): KRISTINA HILLIARD and KATE WURTZEL
Source: Art Education , May 2009, Vol. 62, No. 3 (May 2009), pp. 25-31 
Published by: National Art Education Association 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20694765
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Art Education
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Instructional Resources
 Power and Gender
 in Ancient Egypt:
 The Case of Hatshepsut
 BY KRISTINA HILLIARD AND KATE WURTZEL
 Recommended for Grades 7-9
 Introduction
 Hatshepsut (1479-1458 B.C.E) ruled New Kingdom Egypt for roughly 20 years as one of the
 few female pharaohs in the history of ancient Egypt. Her rule began when her husband died
 and her stepson was too young to be pharaoh. Hatshepsut had to defy the typical feminine
 visual representations used by queens before her in order to establish herself as a king. To legitimize
 her role as pharaoh, Hatshepsut began a significant building campaign by constructing numerous
 images, temples, and obelisks, and by leading military expeditions. Visual representations of
 Hatshepsut range from depictions of her as a female king, physically female in form adorning phara
 onic male accoutrements,1 to images of her as a physically male king with a mans chest and build.
 This Instructional Resource will address issues of how gender and power can be manipulated through
 works of art and architecture in relationship to Hatshepsut s reign as pharaoh.
 Objectives
 During this lesson, and in relationship to their study of
 Hatshepsut and her role in Egyptian history, students will:
 explore Egyptian sculpture and architecture to understand
 how they were used to glorify rulers;
 investigate image, structure, symbol, and composition to
 construct meanings associated with gender, authority, and
 position; and
 demonstrate how art and the design of environments are
 utilized to empower self and others.
 Historical Context
 Although motherhood was considered the pinnacle of a
 woman's achievement in ancient Egyptian society, women, typi
 cally upper-class and royal, were still allowed to be educated, to
 own property and businesses, to obtain a job, and to be involved
 in military leadership (Depla, 1994). More importantly, women
 could rule as pharaoh. This was a rare occurrence, yet it did
 happen.
 Hatshepsut's husband, Thutmose II, died early in his reign,
 leaving his young son, Thutmose III, the son of the king's second
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 May 2009 / ART EDUCATION 25
 26 ART EDUCATION / May 2009
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Instructional Resources
 wife Isis, as the pharaoh of Egypt. Because Thutmose III was too
 young to rule, his stepmother Hatshepsut became his regent, his
 council to rule in his place until he was of age. Her father was the
 previous king and so she was Thutmose Ills closest relative of
 royal birth (Robins, 1983). Soon after, Hatshepsut assumed the
 throne claiming herself king and began constructing sculptures
 and architectural environments depicting her divine birth and
 emphasizing her right to be king (Roehrig, Dreyfus, 8c Keller,
 2005).
 During her reign, representations of Hatshepsut changed. In the
 beginning of her role as regent, Hatshepsut portrayed herself as
 a queen, with physically female characteristics and traditional
 queenly insignia. Soon after, Hatshepsut began depicting herself
 in dual-gendered imagery, as a queen with kingly characteristics.
 Later, Hatshepsut began representing herself in a physically male
 form reminiscent of a canonical pharaoh (Roehrig, Dreyfus, &
 Keller, 2005). In effect, Hatshepsut was slowly addressing the
 intersections of gender and kingship, cultivating a new pharaonic
 identity.
 About the Art: The Power of An Image
 In ancient Egypt, literacy was rare, found mainly among the
 upper- and elite classes of society. Imagery thus functioned to
 educate and was used by the state as propaganda. Visual repre
 sentations such as monuments, sculpture, and reliefs were used to
 persuade the public to follow the king and to understand that the
 king had the divine right to rule. These objects taught the public
 that they should revere the king and be dutiful.
 The role of the pharaoh in ancient Egypt was father and god of
 the land of Egypt. A kings image accompanied by godly symbols
 was used to legitimize the king s power, transforming him into
 a god. Traditional kings displayed themselves as powerful males
 with symbols of both male and femaleness, symbols connected
 to gods and goddesses (Troy, 2003). Hatshepsut's images depart
 from the canon of traditional kingly imagery. Hatshepsut's images
 shifted from one gender to another, but also displayed aspects of
 what may be considered androgyny, meaning that they evoked
 both gender identities together. For example, when she was
 represented as a female king, she wore male accoutrements such
 as the nemes headdress, a cloth folded over the head and tucked
 behind the ears. Furthermore, traditional pharaonic imagery also
 depicts the pharaoh with his principal wife,2 symbolizing the role
 of the royal couple as the mother and father of Egypt. However,
 Hatshepsut was predominantly depicted alone, since she did not
 have a partner to establish her power to the throne. Instead, she
 used aspects of androgyny to include both genders in her imagery,
 conveying the idea that she was both mother and father of Egypt
 by herself. Hatshepsut is the first female king to depict herself in
 this way, and in doing so, she began to gain the acceptance of the
 Egyptian people (Roehrig, Dreyfus, 8c Keller, 2005).
 The Female Pharaoh Hatshepsut. Granite, 65 V* inches. The Metropolitan Museum
 of Art, Rogers Fund, 1929 (29.3.3). Torso lent by Rijksmuseum van Oudheden,
 Leiden (LI 998.80). Image ?The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
 In Hatshepsut as a Female King, Hatshepsut is portrayed as a
 female. She wears a wide collar and a sheer dress, where her
 breasts and feminine curves are shown to advantage. In addition,
 she shows off bracelets and anklets. These displays are typical
 of traditional queenly imagery of ancient Egypt (Robins, 1996).
 However, unlike traditional queens, she wears the pharaonic
 nemes headdress and uraeus adornment, a cobra on the front of
 the headdress. The uraeus is a phallic form associated with the
 sun god (Troy, 2003). The statue also includes two carved images
 of the goddess Taweret. This goddess was associated with the
 protection of women during childbirth, and links Hatshepsut
 to divine birth. According to Roehrig, Dreyfus, & Keller (2005),
 this life-sized statue is not idealized but an individual portrait of
 Hatshepsut, portraying her power and authority to those who
 view the sculpture. Although both female and male characteristics
 are part of the image, the work focuses on the feminine.
 Hatshepsut further broke with tradition by representing herself
 as a man. In Hatshepsut Offers Maat to Amun, Hatshepsut is
 depicted as a male king, who wears the nemes headdress and
 adorns a traditional male wrap. Her torso is uncovered and
 reveals the chest of a man. She also wears the pharaonic beard.
 She is kneeling and offering jars of maat4 to Amun5, a kingly
 temple ritual. Maat is the fundamental order of the universe
 without which all of creation would perish. It was the primary
 duty of the pharaoh to uphold this order by maintaining the law
 and administering justice. Because Hatshepsut is depicted as
 offering maat to Amun, she is displayed as the rightful, dutiful
 king fulfilling her role as pharaoh. The large, open eyes and the
 small, thin nose are similar to that found in her female image.
 She is, however, much more stylized in the fashion of canonical
 representations of ancient Egyptian kings. For all intents and
 purposes, she is a male king, her true identity only discernible
 by inscriptions on the statue, describing her as a "lady of the two
 lands" (Roehrig, Dreyfus, & Keller, 2005).
 To further promote her power and political agenda, Hatshepsut
 built the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut located at Deir El-Bahri
 in western Thebes, the capital city of ancient Egypt. Statues of
 Hatshepsut, including a colossal one as a traditional male king,
 relief images of Hatshepsut as a sphinx trampling her enemies,
 and narrative scenes of particular historical events were displayed
 throughout the temple. Moreover, shrines dedicated to various
 deities were also placed inside the temple in order to legitimize
 Hatshepsufs divine power and right to rule. Hatshepsut placed
 her temple next to that of Mentuhotep Us (2051-2000 B.C.E.),
 a powerful pharaoh during the Eleventh Dynasty who reunited
 Egypt and founded the second golden age of Egyptian history.
 This placement, as well as the use of colonnaded porticoes, ramps,
 and terraces, was purposeful and emphasized her reign as another
 golden age for Egypt (Roehrig, Dreyfus, & Keller, 2005).
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 May 2009 / ART EDUCATION 27
 28 ART EDUCATION /May 2009
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Instructional Resources
 Discussion of Artworks
 After presenting a brief biographical sketch of Hatshepsut and ancient
 Egypt, ask students to discuss their understanding of Egyptian kings
 and queens, describing how they might envision them and what they
 would wear or build to convey power and identity. Present the two
 images of Hatshepsut and the image of the temple and have students
 compare the images, looking specifically at the different masculine or
 feminine qualities found in her portraits and the power conveyed by
 her temple. While comparing the works of art, explain the different
 accoutrements, address the function of the sculptures and temple
 monument, and inquire about their possible message.
 Suggested discussion questions include the following:
 What are the similarities and differences between the sculptures?
 Would you know that these are images of a pharaoh?
 Why or why not?
 How is the pharaoh's power conveyed by the sculptures?
 The architecture?
 What do you think about her portrayal as a male pharaoh? Did it
 or did it not enhance her position in ancient Egyptian society?
 What do you think about her portrayal as a female? Did it or did
 it not enhance her position in ancient Egyptian society?
 Relating the Art to Issues Today
 Reveal to the students how the transition of Hatshepsut s images was
 tied to her identity and evolution as a king in ancient Egypt. Discuss
 how she was able to convince the public of her right to the kingship
 because of her images and building campaign. To relate the work to
 students* lives, ask your pupils to explore their own understanding of
 what it means to be male and female today. Have students consider
 how imagery and symbols in today's society construct ideas about
 femaleness and maleness. In addition, ask students to think about
 how they use objects and images to project a sense of identity and
 power. You may also want to compare Hatshepsut's temple with
 contemporary architectural structures, such as the White House, and
 how they convey power.
 Suggested discussion questions include the following:
 What does it mean to be female or male in today's society?
 How do you know what it means to be a female or male today?
 Can you think of any visual signs, symbols, or architectural
 structures, which contribute to your understanding of what it
 means to be a female or male in todays society?
 Can you think of any visual signs, symbols, or architectural
 structures that might contribute to your understanding of what it
 means to have power in todays society?
 How do you contribute to ideas about gender or power through
 your everyday actions?
 Activity I: Personal Power
 For this activity, students will begin to develop an understanding
 about Hatshepsuts public use of gendered imagery to reinforce her
 position of power. The students will determine how gender issues
 affect their lives today and their sense of personal power. Investi
 gating individual concepts of gender and identity, the students will
 reflect on when they feel powerful as a man or woman and how this
 is reinforced, or not reinforced through society and social imagery.
 The first step is asking students to think about when they feel most
 powerful. The second step is investigating how these powerful
 moments are related to gender concepts and visual imagery. Next,
 have students write four paragraphs during the class period. The
 following prompts can be used to begin the writing exercise.
 Large Kneeling Statue of Hatshepsut. Granite, 102% inches high by 31 Vi inches
 wide, by 5315/i6 inches deep. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Rogers Fund,
 1929 (29.3.1). Image ?The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
 Being female in this world today means:
 Being male in this world today means:
 I feel most powerful when I:
 I feel least powerful when I:
 Studio Activity: My Public Display
 Students will create a two-dimensional mixed-media collage,
 reflecting their identity, power, and individual understandings of
 gender. Encourage students to consider the project as a work of
 public art, which they will display in an architectural environment.
 Ask students to think about any messages they wish to project about
 themselves, any ideas they wish to reinforce about gender, and a
 visual aesthetic they hope to create for their architectural structure.
 To begin, have students strike a pose that expresses a moment when
 they feel most powerful. Take pictures of each pose using a digital
 camera and upload the images onto the computer. Next, allow
 students to experiment with color combinations and value scales on
 the computer. After experimenting, print off the best five manipu
 lated images for each student. Have students transfer their favorite
 manipulated image onto canvas, cardboard, or paper, adding paint to
 construct a mixed-media collage.
 The last step is to incorporate aspects of prior classroom discussion
 into the work of art. Ask students to think back to their discussions
 and writing exercise and recall symbols, images, or structures they
 investigated during the earlier exercises. Students will then search
 through various media sources to locate similar images and integrate
 these into their portraits. Ideally these collaged symbols, objects, and
 structures will be a reflection of how students understand their place
 in society as it relates to identity, gender, and power.
 Studio Activity: My Temple, My Place
 Students will now construct a model for a temple or architectural
 structure, where their images could possibly hang if the building was
 constructed. This temple or architectural diorama should reflect the
 students' identities, their understandings of gender, and what power
 means to them. Students may bring in any size cardboard box and use
 multi media or found objects to decorate their temple. Before they
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 May 2009 / ART EDUCATION 29
 begin to decorate their interiors, students should paint their boxes and allow
 time for them to dry. Once the boxes are dry, students may add various
 objects or images onto the walls and in the interior space of their building.
 After students have completed their temple, ask them to display their works
 along side the earlier two-dimensional images and answer the following
 questions:
 How does this building reflect who I am today or who I hope to be in
 the future?
 What message does my building send to others?
 How is my building a reflection of my identity?
 How is my building a reflection of my world or my environment?
 Would a visitor in my space understand my perspectives on gender and
 power?
 Assessment
 At the conclusion of this unit, have students write a reflection on their
 activities. Entries should address the following questions:
 Did your perception of ancient Egyptian works of art change because of
 this project, and if so how?
 How did this project help you to understand how you define femaleness,
 maleness, and power?
 How does your understanding of gender and power reinforce or
 challenge beliefs in your environment?
 How does Hatshepsut's use of gendered temple sculptures relate to you
 today?
 Conclusion
 Hatshepsut's use of dual-gendered imagery helped to construct her identity
 as pharaoh, and reminded those who walked through her temples of who
 she was. These sculptures, along with the overall reign of Hatshepsut, offer
 opportunities for students to examine ancient Egyptian artwork through the
 lens of gender and power. In addition, Hatshepsut's use of both the female
 and male identity to reinforce her position enables students to investigate
 their conceptions of femaleness, maleness, identity, and power as they are
 constructed and projected in today's society.
 Kristina Hilliard is a McDermott Intern at the Dallas Museum of Art and
 Kate Wurztel is the Director of Education at the Trammell and Margaret
 Crow Collection of Asian Art. Ms. Hilliard can be reached at khilliard@
 dallasmuseumofart.org and Ms. Wurtzel can be reached at kwurtzel@
 crowcollection.org.
 REFERENCES
 Depla, A. (1994). Women in ancient Egyptian wisdom literature. In L. J. Archer, S. Fischler, & M. Wyke (Eds.), Women in ancient
 societies (pp. 24-52). New York: Routledge.
 Robins, G. (1996). Dress, undress, and the representations of fertility and potency in New Kingdom Egyptian art. In . B. Kampen
 (Ed.), Sexuality in ancient art (pp. 27-41). New York: Cambridge University Press.
 Robins, G. (1983). The gods wife of Amun in the 18th dynasty in Egypt. In A. Cameron 8c A. Kuhrt (Eds.), Images of women in
 antiquity (pp. 65-78). Detroit: Wayne State University Press.
 Roehrig, C. H., R. Dreyfus 8c C. A. Keller (Eds.). (2005). Hatshepsut: From queen to pharaoh. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art.
 Troy, L. (2003). She for whom all that is said is done: The ancient Egyptian queen. In S. M. Nelson (Ed.), Ancient queens:
 Archaeological explorations (pp. 93-116). Walnut Creek: Alta Mira Press.
 30 ART EDUCATION / May 2009
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Instructional Resources
 li 11111 h na n_!L?ii!l
 Figure 3. Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut, 18th Dynasty, Deir El Bahri, Egypt.
 ENDNOTES
 1 An accoutrement is an accessory item of clothing or equipment.
 2It was quite common that the pharaoh had numerous wives, yet one wife was considered the principal wife, the
 woman who was represented publicly. Other wives typically were used to bear children.
 3 A vessel used in images to imply an offering to the gods.
 4Egyptian term for truth, justice, and order.
 ^The god of Thebes and creator of the world, who later becomes associated with Re, the sustainer of the world.
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 May 2009 / ART EDUCATION 31