Women's Monumental Mark on Ancient Egypt
Author(s): Barbara S. Lesko
Source: The Biblical Archaeologist , Mar., 1991, Vol. 54, No. 1 (Mar., 1991), pp. 4-15 
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of The American Schools of 
Oriental Research 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/3210327
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The American Schools of Oriental Research  and The University of Chicago Press  are
collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Biblical Archaeologist
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Even female workers were usuallyportrayed
 with dignity and gzace, such as these female
 farmworkers decorating the Fifth Dynasty
 tomb of Ti at Sakkara. Drawing by Leonard
 H. Lesko.
 Womeas
 Monumental
 Mark on
 Ancient
 Egypt
 by BarbaraS. Lesko
 Grand temples and tombs
 and colossal statues bear
 many reminders of Egypt's
 aIlcient queens and fe-
 male pharaohs, but even common
 women left a monumental mark.
 This legacy consists of tomb chapels
 with extensive wall decoration, por-
 trait statues, funerary
 and votive stelae, and _
 offering tables, all _
 bearing the names and
 titles of their owners _==
 or dedicators (even -
 those of their nearest _ g
 relatives). This corpus _b
 iS not well published _a
 and is little studied, _ a
 but has survived in =
 unbelievable quanti- E !
 ties, often because !
 these objects were s
 made of stone. Publi
cation and analysis of
 these monuments has
 unfortunately not
 kept pace with their
 discoveries, so the information gleaned
 from them thus far will be subject to
 correction, or enhancement, as more
 source materials become available.
 Although there is no firm agree-
 ment among Egyptologists on the civil
 rights and economic levels of the dif-
 ferent classes in ancient Egyptian so
ciety-or, indeed, how to distinguish

among them-we know that common

women as well as women in the elite

and royal classes were commemo
rated by physical monuments. I will

concentrate on these monuments,

both artistic and architectural, as a

way of illustrating the independence,
 responsible positions and self-respect
 enjoyed by various classes of women
 in ancient Egyptian society.
 chronological chart} offer the rare
 opportunity to look at a society
 going about its business, not just
 religious and funerary rites but
 agricultural, hunting and economic
 pursuits as well as entertainment
 and sports. The svelte, attractively
 groomed snd fetchingly garbed
 Egyptian woman
 _ cuts a striking figure
 in almost all scenes.
 - Even female workers - are usually portrayed P9 with grace and
 1\X dignity. The wife
 i,jx of the tomb owner
 _ usually figures promi- | nently in tomb scenes
 R _ as her husband's
 R companion and sup
Ei porter. In Old King-
 |sMi dom scenes children
 1sX1 and retainers are
 al typically rendered on
 ! | a much smaller scale.
 _ I When viewing
 tomb walls, it is easy
 to fall into the trap set by the an-
 cient artistic perspective, where
 figures that are meant to be shown
 seated side by side appear to be sit
ting behind one another. Because

the wife is most often depicted as

the survivor and mourner, she is

often portrayed as supporting or

otherwise clasping her husband. It
 was important for the Egyptian artist
 to present the entire human figure,
 and this necessitated placing the
 wife in such a way that she appears
 to be taking a position behind her
 husband when in fact, she is meant
 to be seen as sitting or standing be
side him, as in sculptured groups

that survive from the three major
 early periods.
 What Xmb Art Reveals
 of the Average Woman
 Ancient tombs are found throughout
 the Nile Valley, its limestone cliffs
 harring provided convenient and easily
 cut rock that could be used as build-
 ing blocks or hollowed into, depend-
 ing on the preference of the age.
 Vast expanses of wall decoration
 dating from the later Old Kingdom
 and subsequent Middle and New
 Kingdom periods {see accompanying
 4 Biblical Archaeologist, March 1991
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 This scene from the tomb of Nakht at Thebes,
 dating to the Eighteenth Dynasty, shows
 female musicians entertaining at a banquet.
 Scenes such as this indicate that ancient
 Egyptian women fully mingled in society.
 Photo by Leonard H. Lesko.
 Throughout Egyptian
 history women
 promillent in tomb
 scenes are most
 often depicted as
 companions of the
 men commemorated.
 Iyt-hotep, bearing the title Mistress of the House
 and Chantress of Amon, is pictured in this wall
 decoration from tomb number 96 at Thebes.
 Notice she is carrying an ankh and other cult
 implements. Photo by Leonard H. Lesko.
 Throughout Egyptian history
 women prominent in tomb scenes are
 most often depicted as companions
 of the men being commemorated.
 Their attainments, such as literacy,
 or their most prestigious public ac
tivities are usually only subtly

hinted at in these portraits (through

the ornaments they hold) and are

mentioned very briefly, if at all, in

the accompanying inscriptions. We

can also wonder why more detailed

descriptions of a man's career,

whether in the military, the civil

service, or the temple hierarchy, are
 not shown, whereas in Old Kingdom
 tombs and some tombs dating to
 later periods the supervising of work
 on estates and workshops is empha
sized. It is likely that religious mo
tivation was behind the choice of

tomb scenes. Perhaps the perpetual

abundance of food and water in the

beyond, even the renewal of the life

cycle, is being assured and not the

continuation of earthly concerns

and identities. Thus tomb scenes are

only of limited value in reconstruct
ing peoples' lives, offering a partial

and biased look at the Egyptian

family and society.
 Nevertheless it is obvious from
 these tomb scenes that ancient
 Egyptian women were respected and
 that they fully mingled in society,
 playing many roles, whether in the
 household, the temple cults, or the
 economic realm. Peasant women are
 depicted as helping with the harvest
 and trapping birds; townswomen are
 shown as professional mourners,
 musicians and dancers, members of
 a temple staff and party guests. Rare,
 though extant, are scenes of a woman
 commanding a boat or buying and
 selling goods in the marketplace
 (Fischer 1989: 21). This gives us a
 strong indication that women wielded
 the family's purchasing power, a
 prestigious and definitely not uni
versal position. Also significant is

evidence that in the earliest histori
cal periods weaving workshops were

filled exclusively by women, whereas

men did not move into this impor
tant industry for several centuries.
 In the Old Kingdom, titles de
noting positions of responsibility

and authority belonged to women of

the elite class, who generally were

closely tied by blood or marriage to

the royal family. Tomb inscriptions

of some women provide startling

evidence of their professional in
volvements. One woman tells of be
ing an overseer of female physicians

(Ghalioungui 1975). Another used

the important titles of judge and

vizier, although they may have been

purely honorific (Fischer 1976: 74
75). There is, however, an abundance

of titles for women in positions of

authority, such as Director of the

Dining Hall, Overseer of Funerary

Priests and Overseer of the Weavers'

House, to name a few (Fischer 1976:

70-71). It would seem that few re
strictions were placed on women of

ability and high social status in the

Old Kingdom. It is interesting to
 note that religious positions were
 not limited to noblewomen, for we
 have found priestesses of major god
desses who bear humble titles such
 as tenant farmer.
 Many administrative, honorific
 and priestly titles for women have
 been recovered from Old Kingdom
 monuments; fewer have been found
 from the Middle Kingdom, which
 followed the First Intermediate
 Period, a time of social and economic
 Biblical Archaeologists March 1991 5
 -l ze-4Flw .@
 A; t
 _ if_ ' X
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Throughout Egyptian historyprominent
 women in tomb scenes are most often depicted
 as companions of the men being commemo-
 rated. Here are Renutet, priestess of EIathor,
 and her husband, Yuny. This New Kingdom
 portrait dates to the Nineteenth Dynasty.
 Photo courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum
 of Art, New York (15.2.1, Rogers Fund).
 piece as being unmistakably from
 the Old Kingdom.
 A more attractive female portrait
 is the Middle Kingdom statue of
 Lady Sentluwy, wife of the Nomarch
 Hapdjefi. Originally from Asslut and
 now in the Museum of Fine Arts in
 Boston, this statue is a supreme ex
ample of lifesized Egyptian portrai
ture carved in granite. The grace of

the female figure is enhanced by the

unknown sculptor's disperlsirlg with

the back pillar, which too often mars

Egyptian sculpture in the round. A

very full coiffure lends necessary

support for the head, resulting in a
 The pair statue was verypopular, but women
 were not onlyportrayed in the company of
 their husbands or sons. Individual female
 portraits have been found from throughout
 the centuries. One example is this Mitr.t-
 priestess from Giza, discovered earlier this
 century by an excavation team from the
 University of California at Berkeley. The
 simple dress, stocky build and bold planes of
 the statue characterize it as belonging to the
 Old Kingdom. Photo courtesy of the Lowie
 Museum of Anthropology, the University of
 California at Berkeley (619802).
 instability. Middle Kingdom titles
 for women seldom reflect positions
 of authority (Ward 1989: 34-391,
 which suggests political and eco
nomic changes. Instead, they reveal

a range of jobs in the service indus
tries, from scribe to hairdresser,

gardener to miller (Ward 1986: 8-171.
 During the prosperous empire of
 the New Kingdom, the civil service
 and temple hierarchies became even
 more professionalizedt yet there is
 evidence that women again served in
 the cults of major as well as minor
 temples and that they filled some
 administrative positions, such as
 controlling access to temple stores
 (Lesko 1987a: 211. Numerous texts
 have survived from this period, in
cluding court documents and private

letters revealing that women had

their own independent legal identity

on a par with men and that they

could inherit or purchase property

and dispose of it without a male co
signatory or legal guardian. Indeedt

women were heads of households,

testified in court, witnessed docu
ments, acted as executors of their

family estates and assumed the obli
gations of a citizen vis-a-vis the State.
 Numerous records show this was
 true of free women in generalt not
 just those of the gentry (Allam 1985:
 14-221. On a personal levelt it is
 clear that women enjoyed freedom
 of movement and association, that
 they could marry and divorce at will,
 that they engaged in commerce and
 that they were able to exercise
 authority over others in the work-
 place or temple.
 Statuary of women. In addition to
 wall scenes, tombs and temples con-
 tained private statuary of both women
 and men. Private monuments from
 ancient Egypt tend to be diminutivet
 especially if carved out of stone.
 For much of its history, the pair
 statue showing a husband and wife
 (sometimes a son and mother) seated
 side by side was popular. A woman
 was not only portrayed in the com
pany of her husband or son, however,

as individual portraits of women are

found from throughout the centuries.

One example is the Mitr.t-priestess

from Giza discovered earlier this

century by an excavation team from

the University of California. The

simple dress, stocky build and bold

planes of the statue characterize this
 6 Biblical Archaeologist, March 1991
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Art in New York, was found at Adana
 in Asia Minor.
 Egypt's empire continued to
 expand in the New Kingdom, result
ing in greater cosmopolitan sophistz
cation. During this period portraits

of womerl were created in all media

and sizes, with the womarSs social

status or wealth generally reflected

in the size of the statue. The wife of

a high official might be commemo
rated in a life-sized sculpture, while

women of more humble stations

had to be content with statuettes
 measuring only a foot or two in
 height. Although a woman was
 Egyptians believed
 that when their
 depictions were put
 in tombs it would
 perpetuate them
 into eternal life.
 This Middle Kingdom portrait of Lady
 Sennuwy of Assiut, wife of the Nomarch
 Hapdjefis is a supreme example of life-sized
 Egyptian portraiture carved in granite. Note
 that the unknown sculptor used a full coiffure
 instead of the usual back pillar to support
 the head, resulting in a graceful, more lifelike
 portrayal. Photo courtesy of the Museum of
 Fine Arts) Boston (14. 720).
 As Egypt's empire continued to expand during
 the New Kingdom, a greater cosmopolitan
 sophistication resulted. Typically in this
 more voluptuous age sculptors took great care
 to delineate the curls of women's wigs and
 the texture of their dresses, as exemplified by
 this wooden statuette of Lady Teye dating to
 the Eighteenth Dynasty. Photo courtesy of
 the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
 (41.2.10, Rogers Pund).
 than statues, presumably because
 they were easier to produce and cost
 less, are stelae dedicated to preserving
 the memory of individuals. These
 stelae depict the deceased, and
 sometimes family members, seated
 at a table loaded with food and drinl<.
 They are inscribed with the names
 and titles of the owner land usually
 family membersJ together with an
 invocation that was meant either
 magically to perpetuate the offerings
 of "a thousand each of bread, beer,
 usually paired with a male relative,
 there are several statues in which a
 woman is paired with a female rela-
 tive (usually a mother and daughter),
 and there are individual portrait
 sculptures as well. Typically in this
 more voluptuous age the artist took
 great care to delineate the curls
 of the wigs and the texture of the
 dresses. Some of the most enchant
ing individual portraits of women

are done in wood and come from the
 Ramesside age. The lines of their
 slim and always youthful bodies are
 shown through diaphanous linen
 robes with folds and pleats that are
 especially easy to portray in this
 softer medium. Idealistic portrayals
 were very common apparently be
cause the Egyptians believed that

when such depictions were placed in

tombs they would perpetuate them

into eternal life. After all, who would

not lilne to remain young forever?

Private stelae. Even more common
 more lifelike portrayal. Still, one
 wishes for more autobiographical
 information from these monuments.
 Mysteriously, this statue was found
 far from her home in the Dongola
 region of the Upper Nile, part of a
 barbaric burial. Determining how,
 when and why it got there is prob
lematic. Similarly, a much smaller
 statue of an Egyptian female nurse,
 now in the Metropolitan Museum of
 BiblicalArchaeologist, March 1991 7
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Even more common than statues are stelae
 dedicated to preserving the memory of indi
viduals. These stelae depict the deceased,
 and sometimes family members, sitting at a
 table loaded with food and drink. They are
 inscribed with the names and titles of the
 owner together with an invocation designed
 to ensure sustenance to the deceased and
 family. The ma jority of stelae depict husbands
 and wives, but some women had stelae of
 their own or shared them with female rela-
 tives. This painted limestone stela from the
 Middle Kingdom is dedicated to two women,
 InyotefanAh and Meswet-NetretteXh, by four
 other women, presumably of modest means.
 Photo courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum
 of ArtJ New York (36.3.270).
 oxen, and fowl" or at
 least-provide a text for l l
 passersby to recite and | I
 thus ensure sustenance | !
 to the deceased land | |
 family). l |
 The majority of ste- l
 lae depict husbands and |
 wives, but some women l
 had stelae exclusively of l!
 their own or shared l
 them with female rela- l
 tives. Stelae donated by l
 daughters to commemo
rate their mothers have |
 been found. In any case, |
 the names of the women |
 are often accompanied
 by their titles, whether |
 secular or religious. |
 Many female members X
 of the Old Kingdom elite
 bore the title of King's
 Acquaintance, also
 known from monuments |
 |
 of men. Later, the most |
 common title, regardless 1]
 of social status, was 11
 Mistress of the House. A
 woman who could claim
 a clerical title was sure i
 to mention it on her
 tomb, statue, or stela.
 Such monuments tell of
 the roles women played in ancient
 Egyptian society, which, when
 compared with dates of the source
 materials, changed over time. For
 instance, more women held high
ranking priestess positions in the
 Old Kingdom than in the centuries
 immediately following it (Galvin
 1989: 26)
 Up until the Twelfth Dynasty
 (Middle Kingdom), stelae were made
 for funerary purposes only, but
 about half the pieces dating to the
 Middle Kingdom seem to have been
 dedicated during a persoWs life as
 votives for gods. Similarly, small
 stone offering tables bearing the
 names and titles of the dedicators
 were a favorite form of commemora-
 tion as well as an expression of a
 personts piety. A group of 14 offering
 Iconographic changes
 in scenes depicted on
 stelae have been studied,
 and it is interesting to
 note that as the Twelfth
 Dynasty progressed the
 mother seems increasing
ly to displace the wife in
 . . . ..
 prommence m taml. .y
 scenes on stelae owned
 by men. Even when the
 father is depicted, he is
 never portrayed as promi
nently as the mother

(Pfluger 1947: 128-29).

The importance of the

mother in the Egyptian

family is reflected in the

literature of all periods
 as well as in the fact that
 Egyptian men, even those
 of the highest social class
 and in highest ranlQs of
 the civil service or the
 military, often placed
 only their mothers'
 names on their monu
ments and other docu
ments. Family groups

predominate on stelae

from all periods. As with

stelae depicting only men,

the number of stelae
 designed exclusively for
 women seems to be small. Scenes on
 funerary stelae usually show a male
 figure, probably a son, performing
 rites before his parents, but occa-
 sionally a female figure officiates.
 Female votive stelae, on which only
 the women dedicator is depicted
 worshiping her favorite deities, have
 been found in numerous town and
 cemetery contexts, such as at Deir
 el-Medineh and Abydos.
 Nineteenth-century archae-
 ologist Auguste Mariette found 23
 Late Period stelae of women bearing
 the religious title chantress together
 in one part of the great national
 shrine and necropolis of Abydos,
 which was sacred to Osiris, a god of
 the dead (Mariette 1880: numbers
 1173-94). Of the 23 stelae, only five
 included a husband's figure and name,
 tables dedicated by women were
 found together at Lisht. They were
 apparently dedicated by women of
 modest means, with titles ranging
 from hall keeper to housemaid and,
 possibly, cleaning lady (Ward 1989:
 33-34).
 8 BiblicalArchaeologist, March 1991
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 The best preserved evidence for the status of
 noble women in the initial stages of pharaonic
 Egypt survives from the Fourth Dynasty
 necropolis at Giza. Above: The queens'
 pyramids at the pyramid of Menkaure, pic-
 tured here, show that women shared the
 pharaoh's royal pyramid style tomb. Photo by
 Leonard H. Lesko. Below: Later in the Fourth
 Dynasty other royal women had their flat-
 topped (mastaba) tombs intermixed with
 those of their brothers in the royal Eastern
 Cemetery. Queen MersyanAh III, who died
 before her husband King Khafre and her
 mother Queen Hetepheres II, was laid to rest
 in a large mastaba with above-ground chapels
 inside and outside the superstructure as well
 as an elaborate, beautifully decorated sub
terranean set of rooms hewn in the rock.

Hetepheres and MersyanAh are portrayed in
 this pair statue. Photo courtesy of the
 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (30.1456).
 This impressive tomb built by Queen Khent
kawes lies between the causeways of the sec
ond and third pyramids at Giza. Living at the

end of the Fourth Dynasty, KhentRawes is

believed to have been the dynastic link to the

Fifth Dynasty because her most significant

title translates as Mother of Two Kings of

Upper and Lower Egypt. One of the sons

must have been King Neferirkare, who built

on the south side of his pyramid tomb at Abu

Sir a smaller pyramid tomb for Khentkawes.
 Photo by Leonard H. Lesko.
 whereas 18 belonged to women alone.
 Most of these were chantresses of
 Osiris, but three served Isis and two
 served Amon. This group of stelae
 suggests that women could exercise
 freedom of choice when it came to
 their funerary monuments; it also
 furthers the possibility that wives
 depicted in limited roles in what
 appears to have been their husbands'
 tomb chapel art may not always have
 been buried with their husbands.
 They could have maintained their
 own religious funerary monuments
 at cemeteries and holy shrines of
 their choosing. Because funerary
 and other religious monuments con
tain little biographical information
 -and do not focus on the concerns of
 everyday life, it is fortunate that
 Egyptian texts in the form of personal
 letters and administrative documents
 abound. From these documents a
 much clearer picture of the lives led
 by ordinary Egyptians can be recon-
 structed (compare James 1962, 1984;
 Cerny 1973; Bierbrier 1982; Romer
 1984; Lesko 1987a, 1987b).
 Monuments of Egyptian Queens
 Tombs belonging exclusively to
 women have survived from the be
ginning of Egyptian history. Some
 queens of the early dynasties were
 commemorated with tombs as large
 as those of kings, testimony to their
 all-important heiress position and to
 their religious significance as daugh
ters and wives of god-kings. However,
 the best preserved evidence for the
 status of noble women in the initial
 stages of pharaonic Egypt survives
 from the Fourth Dynasty (Old King
dom) necropolis at Giza. The wives

and mother of Khufu (Cheops), builder
 of the Great Pyramid, shared with
 him the royal pyramid style tomb,
 its magical qualities and the royal
 funerary religious literature lEdwards
 1986: 189-96, 296-302), a privilege
 not granted even to the male heir
 apparent. Later in the dynasty other
 royal women had their large, flat
topped (mastaba) tombs inter
mingled with those of their brothers
This content downloaded from 
 
 in the royal Eastern Cemetery. For
 instance, Queen Mersyankh III, who
 died before her husband King Khafre
 and her mother Queen Hetepheres II,
 was laid to rest in a large mastaba
 with above-ground chapels inside
 and outside the superstructure as
 well as an elaborate subterranean set
 of rooms hewn in the rock and beau-
 tifully decorated with wall reliefs
 and sculpture hewn from the living
 rock (Dunham and Simpson 19741.
 Between the causeways of the
 second and third pyramids at Giza
 lies an impressive tomb built by
 Queen Khentkawes. Living at the
 end of the Fourth Dynasty, she is
 believed to have been the dynastic
 link to the Fifth Dynasty because
 her most significant title translates
 as Mother of Two Kings of Upper
 and Lower Egypt. One of the sons
 must have been King Neferirkare,
 who built his pyramid tomb at near-
 by Abu Sir; there he provided, on the
 south side, a smaller pyramid tomb
 for Khentkawes, thus restoring to
 her the benefits of such a tomb style.
 Her original large tomb may not
 have seemed so inferior to the queen
 mother, however, because King
 Shepseskhaf, who ruled at the end of
 Biblical Archaeologisto March 1991 9
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 This colossal figure of Queen Nefertari,
 flanked by those of her husband} Ramesses
 the Great, are cut into the facade of Nefertari's
 temple at Abu Simbel, located several hundred
 yards to the north of the main temple Larger-
 than-life statues of queens appeared in the
 Old Kingdom and continued into the Middle
 Kingdom} but it was during the New Kingdom
 that the most dazzling array of monuments
 commemoratinggreat women was produced.
 Photo by Leonard H. Lesko.
 Duality of rulership seems to be expressed by
 this powerful Fourth Dynasty portrait group
 of King Menkaure and Queen Khamerernebty,
 as the figures are of equal size and stance.
 Photo by Leonard H. Lesko, courtesy of the
 Museum of Fine ArtsJ Boston.
 become well-known from another
 portrait that recently traveled the
 world as part of the Rarnesses the
 Great exhibition.
 If the wife and family of Rames
ses II are lilliputians next to his four
 colossi at Abu Simbel's greater
 temple, so too is the supreme god
 Re, depicted on his perch above the
 entrance door. The fact that the
 king's family were often depicted at
 the level of the legs of his colossal
 figure should not blind us to the im
portance of the great royal wife in
 Egyptian history. The queen was often
 of purer royal blood than her hus
band, whose claim to the throne she
 legitimized. In religious terms, the
 queen was the embodiment of the
 goddesses Hathor (wife of Re) and
 the Fourth Dynasty, had also elected
 to have this same style of tomb,
 which loolred lilre a giant sarcophagus
 mounted on a high podium. How-
 ever, the practice of providing a pyra
mid tomb for queens continued into

the Sixth Dynasty and the Twelfth
 Dynasty, after which time royal
 pyramids were abandoned in favor of
 more hidden, rock-hewn sepulchres.
 During the Old Kingdom, prin
cesses and wives of powerful men

were often provided with stelae and

statuary for their tombs from the

royal workshops. In time their
 mastaba tomb chapels, like those of
 their husbands, became more and
 more elaborate. Whole suites of
 rooms invaded the mass of the
 mastaba, their walls covered entire-
 ly with depictions of the owners,
 their retinues, and activities on their
 estates. It is unfortunate that the
 publlcation of one of the most sig
nificant tombs of the Sixth Dynasty,

that of Prince Mereruka, neglected the

rooms devoted to his wife, Princess
 Watetkhet-Hor, and concentrated on
 only the husband's part of the tomb
 lDuell 1938). Such were the biases of
 male researchers in the 1930s.
 The monuments of ancient Egyp
tian queens or great royal wives las

they were called) are too numerous

to recount here. Many are familiar

to everyone, however, such as the

painted portrait bust of Queen Nefer
titi, wife of the controversial pharaoh

Alrhenaten, or the colossal figure of

Nefertari, wife of Ramesses the Great,

sculpted into the facade of the smaller

temple of Abu Simbel. Larger-than
life statues of queens appeared in the

Old Kingdom and continued into

the Middle Kingdom, but it was dur
ing the Eighteenth and Nineteenth

Dynasties that the most dazzling

array of monuments commemorat
ing great women was produced. The

colossal pair statue of Amenhotep III

and his common-born wife Queen

Tiy dominates the main court of the

Cairo Museum, and a colossus 131

feet tall) of the daughter of Ramesses

the Great once stood beside his colos
sus that still stands at a temple in

Akhmim. The attractive features of

this princess, Meryetamun, have
 10 BiblicalArchaeologistJ March 1991
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 for her father. Inscriptions in the
 temple purport to quote Thutmose I
 as pronouncing his daughter his heir
 and asking the chief men of the realm
 to support her (Naville 1898: plates
 LXI-LXII). Not content with this pa-
 ternal political supportf Hatshepsut
 also clarified her divine right to rule
 by recording the miracle of her birth
 on the walls of the second terrace,
 north endf with vast and detailed
 scenes-of her divine conception and
 birth (Naville 1896: plates XLVII-
 XLIX; LIII-LIV). Also illustrated are
 how Amonf king of the gods} desig-
 nated HatshepsutJs mother to be his
 bride; how she conceived Hatshepsut;
 how all the great ancestral goddesses
 aided her birth and suckled her; andJ
 laterf how the great god arranged and
 presided over her coronation. To
 celebrate 15 years on the thronef
 Hatshepsut held a jubilee and erected
 obelisks sheathed in gold alloy; they
 were taller than her fatherfs and
 loomed above the roof line of the
 Rarnak temple.
 Mut (wife of Amon); in earlier ages
 she was closely associated with the
 goddess Neit. The famous pair stat
ue in the Museum of Fine Arts in

Boston depicting King Menkauref
 builder of the third Giza pyramid,
 and his queenf Khamerernebtyf is
 the epitome of equality in size and
 strength. The two figures share the
 traditional masculine stance of left
 foot forward. The queens features are
 repeated on statues of the goddess
 Hathor found nearby in this temple.
 Some daughters of the godJ as
 full-blooded royal princesses were
 calledf not only legitimized a half
brother or an unrelated candidateJs

claim to rulef they actually took the
 reins of government. The best known
 example of this was Hatshepsut in
 the Eighteenth Dynasty. Her mag
nificent mortuary temple at Deir el
Bahri is the greatest monument to
 a woman surviving from antiquity.
 Numerous statues of her have been
 uncovered by excavations, most of
 which are on display at the Metro
politan Museum of Art in New York.

They include leonine sphinxes and
 towering Osiride statuesZ all bearing
 the queenfs delicately feminine face.
 Some sculptures show Hatshepsut
 in garb traditionally worn by male
 pharaohs; others show her in a dress.
 New Kingdom pharaohs were apt
 to provide chapels for their predeces
sors within their own mortuary

templesZ but Hatshepsut, instead

of dedicating a chapel for her late

husband, turned it over to services
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Above: The terraced mortuary temple of
 Queen Hatshepsut at Deir el-Bahri on the
 west bank at Luxor is the greatest monument
 to a woman survivingfrom antiquity. Left:
 There are numerous statues of this Eigh
teenth Dynasty queenJ who reigned d7uring an

age of prosperity, sophistication and relative
 peace. This sphinx emphasizes Hatshepsutts
 kingly role by presenting her as a lion, an age
old motif regarded as the prerogative of kings.
 Photo courtesy of the Metropolitan M7useum
 of 24rtJ New York (31.3. 94).
 successorl Thutmose IZ when he set
 up a colossal statue of the old quee.n
 in the court he built at Karnak. It
 was Thut mo s e's daughterZ Hat shep 
sutS who later succeeded to the
 Godls Wife position.
 During the last
 10 dynasties
 private statuary
 markedly decreased.
 After her deathJ Ahmose
Nefertari was deifiedZ and her name

was evoked in prayers alongside
 those of the Theban holy triad. Her
 cult was popular in Egypt for many
 centuriesZ particularly among the
 Ancient Egyptian Chronology
 3100-30 B.C.E.
 First Dynasty 3100-2890
 Second Dynasty 2890-2686
 Old Ktngdom
 Third Dynasty 26862613
 Pourth Dynasty 2613-2494
 Fifth Dynasty 2494-2345
 Sixth DyIlasty 2345-2181
 1st Intermediate Period 2181-2050
 Middle Kingdom
 Eleventh Dynasty 2134-1991
 Ael fth Dynasty 1991 1786
 2nd Intermediate Period 1786-1567
 New Kingdom
 Eighteenth Dynasty 1567-1320
 Nineteenth Dynasty 1320-1200
 Twentieth Dynasty 1200-1085
 3rd Intexmediate Period 1085-747
 Late Period
 Rushite (Twenty-fifih} Dynasty 747-664
 Saite (Twenty-sisth} Dynasty 664-52S
 Persian Conquest 525
 AlexanderJs Conquest 332
 Ptolemaic Rule 305-30
 Hatshepsut reigned in an age of
 prosperityZ sophistication and rela
tive peaceZ which she claimed to

have kept herself by joining her
 troops across EgyptZs southern boun-
 dary ill displays of military force.
 Hatshepsut was followed on the
 throne by her nephewZ the highly
 capable ruler Thutmose IIII who has
 been called the Napoleon of Egypt
 for his empire building (although he
 was really repeating exploits of
 HatshepsutZs father). Thlltmose III is
 believed to have been responsible for
 the eventual destruction of Hatshep
sutZs monumexlts. If so, we must sus
pect that the memory of this strong
 female pharaoh lingered in the
 minds of her people and was viewed
 as a threat by her male successors.
 Hatshepsut came from a long line
 of dynamic women. Among these
 was Queen Ahmose-Nefertaril wife
 of AhmoseZ founder of the Eighteenth
 Dynasty. Ahmose-Nefextari was
 given considerable authority ixl the
 cult of the King of the Gods whexl
 she was made GodJs Wife of AmonZ
 a position that held a chief role as a
 priestess in the national cult center
 and was provided with goods and
 property legally documexlted and
 published for all to see on a monu-
 mental stela set up in the temple of
 Amon at Karnak (Robins 1983: 70
73). There is no question that

Ahmose-Nefertari functioned active
ly as a priestess in the Amon cult
 and that she wielded considerable
 economic power and controlled build
ing projects at several cult sites
 throughout the country. Even beyond
 thist her royal titles included the ex
ceptional Female Chieftain of Upper

and Lower Egypt, which malnes it
 lilrely that after her husband died
 she ruled as regent for her sont
 Amenhotep I. New Kingdom queens
 generally had to be content with
 having their funerary cult place
 within the mortuary temple of their
 husbandst but Amerlhotep erected a
 mortuary temple for her. Ahmose
Nefertari outlived Amenhotep and

was honored as well by his picked
 Wall paintixlgs in many private
 tombs memorialize the great queen.
 Major monuments of another
 Eighteenth Dynasty queen came un
expectedly to light when a University
 of Toronto excavation team led by
 Donald B. Redford set out to recover
 temples that the heretic king Amen
hotep IV (Akhexlaten) built at Karnak

and dedicated to his new god, the

solar discJ Aten. Such structures

were known to exist because of the

thousands of looseZ small stone

blocks (ta1atat) that had lain un
assembled for many years, like mis
placed pieces of a jigsaw pussleZ in

the shadows of the Karnak temple.

When Canadian and Egyptian archae
ologists began to study the blocks

and uncover moxe from the interior

of the second and tenth pylons (where

the blocks had been reused after

Akhenaten/s temples had been torn

down) the excavators were astonished

to find that the predominant royal

figure in the cult of the god was
 Queen Nefertiti.
 The largest of the two Aten
 temples at Karnak (the Gem Pa Aten)
 had many rows of piexs decorated
 with large scenes of Nefertiti and her
 eldest daughter, MeretatenZ sacrific-
 ing to the sun disk at the high altar.
 Axlother temple, the Maxlsion of the
 Benben Stone (the age-old sacred
 totem of the sun godit was awholly
 given over to the use of the queenZ'
 (Redford 1984: 138). Its pyloned gate
ways also had large scenes showing

the queen and her eldest daughters

as celebrants in the cult. The queen

appears twice as often as her husband

in the talatat scenes and sometimes

in other pharaonic roles, such as in

the guise of a warrior brandishing a

scimitarZ ready to smite a captive

(Redford 1984: 78).
 Egyptologists have yet to resolve
 the question of why Nefertiti is so
 much more prominent than Akhena
ten in scenes at Thebes. Was she as
signed to the sacred city as a repre
sentative of the king ruling from the

old capltal of Memphis in the north?

Such a role later fell to the daughters
 tomb workers of the pharaohs who
 thought of her and her son as their
 special patrons because under them
 the workersZ village in the great
 Theban necropolis was founded.
 12 BiblicalArchaeologistJ March 1991
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Above right: Nefertiti was the wife of Amenhotep IV (Akhenaten), the controversial figh
teenth Dynasty pharaoh who worshiped the solar disc, Aten, above all other gods. In this

scene from one Aten temple at Karnak (now destroyed), Nefertiti and her daughter are shown

offering sacrifices at the altar of Aten, whose rays shine down upon them. Courtesy of Donald

B. Redford. Above: On some talatat scenes frorn Karnak, Nefertiti is shown in pharaonic roles,

as in this image of her boat that includes a kiosk (top block, far lefi) in which she is portrayed
 as a warrior ready to strike an enerny. Photo courtesy of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
 (63.260, 64.521).
 name change and even greater politi
cal power for Nefertiti in the guise of

King Smenkhkare (Sampson 1985:

83-99), but recent research on the

royal mummy found in tomb 55 in

the Valley of the Kings (Harris 1989)

seems to confirm that another young

royal man, very likely a brother of

Tutankhamun, preceded Tut on the

throne of the pharaohs. Possibly

Nefertiti had become ill or blind by

middle age-blindness is a distinct

possibility for anyone who stares

directly into the sunfs rays, especially

on numerous occasions-but, in any

case, her days of glory seem to have

been in her youth
 During the last 10 dynasties pri
vate statuary noticeably decreased,

perhaps as a result of economic un
certainties, but numerous monu
ments of various types-statues,

tombs, temple shrines and monu
mental inscriptions-belong to

women of rank in Egypt's postempire
 dynasties, the Third Intermediate
 Period and the Late Period. Pharaohs
 of the Twenty-first to Twenty-third
 Dynasties ruled from the north but
 felt the need to have a family repre
sentative based in the south, a posi
tion which, after the New Kingdom,

became politically independent

under the high priests of Amon.

During this period pharaohs turned

to their daughters and not their sons

to represent their interests in the

south. Thus a royal princess was cus
tomarily married to a Theban high

priest and became a chief concubine

of Amon-Re. The daughter of such a

union would assume the old sacer
dotal title of God's Wife of Amon. As

previously discussed, numerous ben
efices accompanied this title. Decrees

in the name of the R;ing of the Gods

were carved on the walls of Karnak's

seventh and tenth pylons, confirming

the proprietary rights of these royal
 women and extending deification to
 them posthumously. With estates
 and officials to serve them, the God's
 Wives lived like monarchs and car
ried out the official religious func-
 tions hitherto reserved for the king.
 of the monarchs of the Third Inter
mediate Period. Akhenaterl's prede-
 cessor, Amenhotep III, seemsto have
 favored Thebes as his residence, and
 he may have had a closer relation
ship with Nefertiti than is usually
 thought, possibly as the surrogate
 father of her children. If medical
 experts are correct and Akhenaten
 suffered from Froehliclis syndrome
 (a malfunction of the pituitary that
 causes, among other conditions,
 sterilityl, he could not have fathered
 Nefertiti's six daughters (Harris and
 Hussien 1988: 126; Aldred 1988:
 231-321. Her father-in-law, however,
 had already sired several daughters
 and would have been the only rea
sonable answer to the young couple's

desire for heirs. Scenes depicting

Amenhotep III as a corpulent old

man were found at the site of Tell

el-Amarna, where Akhenaten and
 being more obviously physically fit
 than her husband, may simply have
 arrogated to herself political and
 religious power. Once Amenhotep III
 died, however, Nefertiti seems to
 have gradually lost out to her eldest
 daughter, whose presence in inscrip-
 tions began to increase and who
 apparently became her father's new
 favorite (Redford 1984: 187-88).
 Some scholars have argued for a
 Nefertiti did not reside until year sis
 of Akhenaterl's reign. It is possible,
 as Cyril Aldred has suggested, that
 these and other scenes indicate
 Amenhotep III was still alive at the
 time (Aldred 1988: 176-821. Thus he
 could have fathered Nefertiti's chil
dren as well as been a strong baclrer

of her leadership role to the dis-
 advantage of his sickly and deformed
 son. It is also possible that Nefertiti,
This content downloaded from 
 
 Biblical Archaeologist, March 1991 13
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 In addition to monumental inscriptions and
 individualportraits, royal women bearing
 the title of God's Wife left funerary monu-
 ments and tombs. Along the southeastern
 corner of the great outer wall of the mortuary
 temple of Ramesses III at Medinet Habu is a
 series of elegant funeral chapelsJ pictured
 here. Among the best preserved is the sand
stone chapel of Amenirdis I. Photo courtesy

of The Oriental Institute of The University of
 Chicago.
 Indeed, later pharaohs installed their
 daughters in this important post.
 Impoverishment and insecurity
 marked the postempire period, and
 the Twenty-second Dynasty was
 marked by near civil war between
 Upper and Lower Egypt, leaving the
 door open to invasion from the south.
 A Kushite (Nubian) invasion in the
 Twenty-fifth Dynasty brought peace
 pontiff maintained her presence as
 the chief sacerdotal authority in
 Thebes. Indeed, most scholars who
 have written about this phenomenon
 believe that the God's Wife was a
 veritable sovereign of the Theban
 area and areas to the south. Certainly
 the royal women who functioned in
 this office dominated the official art
 of the period.
 Shepenupet I, daughter of the
 last native ruler, was forced to adopt
 Amenirdis I, the daughter of the
 Kushite ruler Kashta, an ardent fol
lower of Amon. Amenirdis I ruled

joirltly with Shepenupet I for at least

13 years. As the God's Wife, Amenir
dis I left many monuments, includ
ing some finely sculptured portraits

of herself. One portrait, now in the

Joslyn Art Museum in Omaha, Ne
braska, is not the most flattering of

Amenirdis (although it plays down
 her foreign featuresl and harlnens
 back to much older artistic tradi
tions. More innovative and alive is

the faience statuette in Cairo of the

same God's Wife shown in the lap of

the god Amon; they are in a close em
brace, with their arms flung around

each other. No product of Egyptian

artists has ever better displayed such
 passion between lovers.
 In addition to monumental in
scriptions and individual portraits,
 royal women bearing the title of
 God's Wife left funerary monuments
 and tombs. Along the southeastern
 corner of the great outer wall of the
 mortuary temple of Ramesses III at
 Medinet Habu, located on the south
ern end of the west bank at Luxor, is

a series of elegant funeral chapels

(Hoelscher 1954: 17-29). Among the

best preserved is the sandstone chapel

of Amenirdis I with its fine, raised

relief decoration and figures drawn

in "classic proportions and purity of

line" (Aldred 1980: 222). Amenirdis's
 inscriptions, like those of others
 who held the title of God's Wife, de
scribe her as Mistress of Upper and

Lower Egypt, and at death she was
 deified.
 Less than a century after the
 reign of Amenirdis, a northern Egyp
tian leader whose power base was

the city-of Sais in the Nile Delta

came to the fore with Assyrian help
 and founded the Twenty-sixth Dy
nasty. This ruler, Psamtik, had his

young daughter, Nitocris, adopted
 into the College of Divine Adoratrices
 at Thebes, although she had to wait
 her turn during the reigns of Shepe-
 nupet II and her adopted daughter
 (and actual niece) Amenirdis EI. A
 huge granite stela set up at Karnak's
 west end documents Psamtik's formal
 entrance into Thebes and the endow-
 ment to be given to Nitocris after
 the death of those holding the title
 of God's Wife (Caminos 1964: 74 76).
 Nitocris lived for 70 years beyond
 the date of her adoption into the
 priestly hierarchy. She adopted her
 own great niece, Ankhes Neferibres
 Amenirdis I, daughter of the Kushite ruler
 Kashta, ruled jointly with Shepenupet I,
 daughter of the last native ruler, for at least
 13 years during the Twenty-fifth Dynasty.
 As the God's Wife, Amenirdis left many
 monuments, including some finely sculp
tured portraits, such as this piece now in the

Joslyn Art Museum in Omaha, Nebraska

(1953. 80). The style of the wig harkens back

to Middle Kingdom and even Old Kingdom

coiffures7 but the crown is more suggestive

of the New Kingdom. Photo courtesy of the
 Joslyn Art Museum.
 who became the last God's Wife but
 lost her power in 525 B.C.E. as a result
 of the Persian conquest of Egypt.
 Space does not allow for a review
 of the many monuments dating to
 the Ptolemaic Period and its famous
 queens (most notedly Arsinoe II and
 Cleopatra VII). Suffice it to say that
 although Egypt's last independent
 rulers were foreign born they found
 only at the cost of many lives, and
 this peace was once again broken by
 attacks from the east. Not only did
 mighty Assyria invade Egypt twice,
 but Assyrian troops extended their
 rampage as far up the river as Thebes,
 where they desecrated the great
 temples and stripped them of much
 treasure. Through it all, in unbroken
 succession by adoption, the female
 14 Biblical Archaeologist, March 1991
This content downloaded from 
 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 much to emulate from earlier Egyp
tian culture, the political importance

of the royal women as well as the

grand temples. These rulers also r
spected the age-old legal traditions
 of independence and greater rights
 for women by allowing two law codes
 to coexist so that women-Egyptian
 or Hellene-would not have to suffer
 the constraints of Greek laws but
 would have a choice as to which they
 would use (Pomeroy 1984: 119 20).
 During the classical age, well
read authors were the best publicists

for the independence of the Egyptian

woman, which they found quite shock
ing. The Greek historian Herodotus,

for example, commented:
 As the Egyptians have a climate
 peculiar to themselves . . . so
 have they made all their customs
 and laws of a kind contrary for
 the most part to those of all other
 men. Among them, the women
 buy and sell, the men abide at
 home and weave; and whereas
 in weaving all others push the
 woof upwards, the Egyptians
 push it downwards. Men carry
 burdens on their heads, women
 on their shoulders {Histozy,
 book 2, chapter 35; see Godley
 1966: 315-16).
 Conclusion
 As these monuments show, modern
 archaeology has uncovered concrete
 evidence that ancient Egyptian
 women led full lives. Although
 monuments left by commoners are
 not as large in scale or as fine as
 those of royal woment they are most
 eloquent, for they speak of indepen
dence and self-respect on the part of

many women who lived in Egypt

more than 3,000 years ago.
 Bibliography
 Aldred, C.
 1980 Egyptian Art in the Days of the
 Pharaohs. New York: Oxford Univer-
 sity Press.
 1988 Akhenatent King of Egypt. New
 York: Thames & Hudson.
 Allam, S.
 1985 Some Pages from Everyday Life
 in Ancient Egypt. Giza: Prism
 Publications.
 Bierbrier, M.
 1982 Tomb Builders of the Pharaohs.
 London: The British Museum.
 Caminos, R.
 1964 The Nitocris Adoption Stela. Iournal
 of Egyptian Archaeology 50: 71-101.
 Cerny, J.
 1973 A Community of WorAmen at
 Thebes in the Ramesside Period.
 Cairo: Institut Francais d'Archeologie
 Orientale.
 Duell, P.
 1938 The Mastaba of Mereruka, two vol-
 umes. Series: Oriental Institute Pub
lications 31 and 39. Chicago: Univer-
 sity of Chicago Press.
 Dunham, D., and Simpson, W. K.
 1974 The Mastaba of Queen MersyanAh
 III. Boston: Museum of Fine Arts.
 Edwards, I. E. S.
 1986 The Pyramids of Egypt, new edition.
 New York: Viking Press.
 Fischer, H. G.
 1976 Varia Egyptian Studies I. New York:
 Metropolitan Museum of Art.
 1989 Women in the Old Kingdom and the
 Heracleopolitan Period. Pp. 5-24 in
 Womens Earliest Records: From
 Ancient Egypt and Westezn Asia,
 edited by B. S. Lesko. Atlanta:
 Scholars Press.
 Galvin, M.
 1989 Addendum to "Women in the Old
 Kingdom and the Heracleopolitan
 Period," by H. G. Fischer. Pp. 28-30
 in Women's Earliest Records: From
 Ancient Egypt and Western Asia,
 edited by B. S. Lesko. Atlanta:
 Scholars Press.
 Ghalioungui, P.
 1975 Les plus anciennes femmes-medecins
 de ltistoire. Bulletin de l tInstitut
 FranSais d'Archeologie Orientale 75:
 159-64.
 Godley, A. D., translator
 1966 Herodotus I, Books I and II. Series:
 Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge,
 MA, and London: Harvard University
 Press and Heinemann.
 Harris, J. E.
 1989 The Mummy of Amenhotep III
 (61074) and the Mummy found in
 Wonab 557 SmenAhiare t6107@. Paper
 presented at the Annual Meeting of
 the American Research Center in
 Egypt, Philadelphia.
 Harris, J. E., with Hussien, F.
 forth- The Mummy of Amenhotep III. Ab-
 coming stracts of Papers of the Fifth Inter
national Congress of Egyptology.
 Cairo, 1988.
 Hoelscher, U.
 1954 The Excavation of Medinet Habu v
This content downloaded from 
 
 Series: Oriental Institute Publica-
 tion 66. Chicago: University of
 Chicago Press.
 James, T. G. H.
 1962 The HeXanakhte Papers and Other
 Early Middle Kingdom Documents.
 New York: Metropolitan Museum of
 Art.
 1984 Pharaoh's People. London: The
 Bodley Head.
 Lesko, B. S.
 1987a The Remariable Women of Ancient
 Egypt, second edition. Providence,
 RI: B.C. Scribe Publications.
 1987b Women of Egypt and the Ancient
 Near East. Pp. 41-77 in Becoming
 Visible: Women in European History,
 second edition, edited by R. Briden
thal, C. Koonz and S. Stuard. Boston:
 Houghton-Mifflin.
 Mariette, A.
 1880 Catalogue General des monuments
 d'Abydos decouverts pendants les
 fouilles de cette ville. Paris:
 Llmprimerie nationale.
 Naville, E.
 1896 The Temple of Deir el Bahri, Part II.
 London: Egypt Exploration Fund.
 1898 The Temple of Deir el Bahri, Part III.
 London: Egypt Exploration Fund.
 Pfluger, K.
 1947 The Private Funerary Stelae of the
 Middle Kingdom and Their Impor
tance for the Study of Ancient Egyp-
 tian History. Aourna] of the American
 Oriental Society 67 127-35.
 Pomeroy, S.
 1984 Women in Hellenistic Egypt from
 Alexander to Cleopatra. New York:
 Schocken Books
 Redford, D. B.
 1984 Akhenaten the Heretic King. Prince-
 ton: Princeton University Press.
 Robins, G.
 1983 The God's Wife of Amun in the 18th
 Dynasty in Egypt. Pp. 65-78 in
 Images of Women in Antiquity,
 edited by A. Cameron and A. Kuhrt.
 Detroit, MI: Wayne State University
 Press.
 Romer, J.
 1984 Ancient Lives. New York Holt,
 Rinehart and Winston.
 Sampson, J.
 1985 Nefertsti and Cleopatra. London:
 Rubicon Press.
 Ward, W. A.
 1986 Essays on Feminine Titles. Beirut:
 American University of Beirut.
 1989 Non-royal Women and Their Occu-
 pations in the Middle Kingdom. Pp.
 33-43 in Women's Earliest Records:
 From Ancient Egypt and Western
 Asia, edited by B. S. Lesko. Atlanta:
 Scholars Press.
 Biblical Archaeologist, March 1991 15
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms